On 14th and 15th October 2011, the Society for Art History in Finland, in association with the Ateneum Art Museum, the Department of Art History at the University of Helsinki and Eidos, the student organisation of art history at the University of Helsinki, arranged TAHITI 4, the fourth conference of art historians in Finland. The theme of the conference was “Empiria in Art History”.

In the call for papers was asked e.g. How empiria in the form of architecture, visual art, design, applied art, or archive material, is shaped through research into results and interpretations?; Do bodies of material as such contain ‘truths’, and if so, what is their ontological status, or does our understanding of the nature and essence of materials depend solely on the choice of research problems, approaches, theories and methods?;

How do we perceive, conceptualize and define time in relation to materials, their readings and re-readings, trends, methods, the researcher’s role, or source criticism?;

Are existing classifications neutral – theory-free ways of perceiving reality and do the scholarly and scientific classifications of museums, archives and libraries basically represent empiria? Is empiria the same as a conventional way of arranging objects and if so, its purpose being to increase order, would its opposite be entropy – chaos?

Two keynotespeakers were invited to the conference. Professor David Gaimster, Director of the Hunterian Museum and Art Gallery at the University of Glasgow, spoke about the subject: Visualising the domestic interior in the European late Middle Ages: cross-referencing archaeological and iconographic sources. The title of Docent Jari Pakkanen, Senior Lecturer in Classical Archaeology at Royal Holloway, University of London was Quantum models and detecting design patterns in architecture. In addition, there were nine papers throwing light on the empirical questions in art history from many different points of view dealing e. g. different kind of archives, gardening history, art historical writings and discourses as also the importance of paintings as a source of knowledge. The papers were chosen on the basis of submitted abstracts by Docent, Senior Lecturer Markus Hiekkanen (Art History/University of Helsinki), Chief Curator Riitta Ojanperä (National Gallery of Finland), Museum Director, Dr Susanna Pettersson (Alvar Aalto Foundation) and Docent Johanna Vakkari (Society for Art History in Finland / Finnish Academy of Fine Arts). Other members of the organizing group were MA Julia Donner, MA Virve Heininen and MA Pinja Metsäranta from the Society for Art History in Finland.

At the conference there was also a panel discussion in Finnish about Art-historical research and future competency needs, chaired by Susanna Pettersson and participated by Elina Heikka (Finnish Museum of Photography), Heikki Hanka (University of Jyväskylä), Juhani Kostet (National Board of Antiquities) and Johanna Vakkari.

In this very first dossier of Tahiti-journal, we are publishing four articles based on the papers presented at the conference.

In his article, Visualising the domestic interior in the European late medieval to early modern transition: cross-referencing archaeological and iconographic sources, professor David Gaimster is pointing out the importance of combining archaeological material with pictorial records in order to explore the economic, social, material and ideological changes in modern European culture. His study concerns mainly the paintings produced in Low Countries and in Germany from 15th to 17th century and the ways these works of art can be interpreted as sources. Although a painting never is a mimetic study of the social reality, its purposes being metaphorical (religious or socially motivated) it locates the archaeological objects in relation to spaces, people and other objects. Pictorial sources, when considered together with archaeological discoveries and written records, can tell us, not only about domestic life in general, but also on the history of taste, economy, global trade and the role of gender.

PhD candidate Anne-Maria Pennonen’s article is entitled: In Pursuit of Geological Motifs – Landscape painting in Dresden and Düsseldorf 1780–1860. Pennonen discusses the relationship between geology and landscape painting. She uses the 19th century scientific approaches and the new attitude towards the nature and especially towards mountains, present both in contemporary literature and in painting, as an empirical source in her study. The most important protagonists among the writers are Alexander von Humboldt, Johan Wolfgang von Goethe, Carl Custav Carus and Johan Wilhelm Schirmer. Pennonen describes the links between art and science and the ways in which the 19th century painters and writers experienced nature and argued it with such qualities like sublime, beautiful and picturesque. As a concrete example she presents the valley of Neanderthal near Düsseldorf, the destination of many artistic expeditions.

PhD candidate Marja-Terttu Kivirinta’s empirical materials are the discourses on the Finnish painter Juho Rissanen. In her article, Biographical Narratives of Artist as Empirical material: Juho Rissanen. A Representation of Recycled Art and Life Story, she concentrates on two narratives comparing their structure with the canon of Art History since Vasari’s Giotto, and reinterpreting them in the context of contemporary gender studies dealing also with the problematics of “national”.

PhD Leena Svinhufvud is specialized in textile art. In her article, From sketches and samples to ledgers and advertisements On the material of art historical research of modern textile art, she takes into consideration the impact of the surviving archives on research. She discusses the art historical research of the 20th century textile art, focusing mainly on ryijy-textiles and hand woven serial production in the collections of Design Museum Helsinki. Svinhufvud shows how the fragmentariness of the archives causes a lack of statistical validity and may result in some changes in classifying and interpreting the objects. Also the documents concerning designers, weaveries, design officers and studios are limited. According to Svinhufvud, this is due to the selection processes that precede the formation of a collection. Both the donator and the museum have to decide what kind of material is worth preserving and since the interests, attitudes and points of view of the research, as also the art historical paradigms, are continually changing, a lot of material that today is considered relevant, has been wasted. In consequence, the truthfulness of an archive is always to be questioned.

Paintings and prints of the early modern period serve to document the development of domestic culture over an epoch of profound economic, social and cultural change and place historical or archaeological objects in a specific functional or symbolic context that is normally absent from the excavated record. The archaeological deposit, whether a rubbish pit or latrine shaft, post-hole or a midden, normally reflects the final point of discard or loss of a possession or utensil. Only strict ‘time capsule’ deposits, such as a violent destruction horizon or a shipwreck, for instance, can reveal something of the ‘active life’ of an object prior to deposition.[2] The image, particularly those depicting the domestic interior, offer a glimpse of objects in use before discard and crucially in their relationship to the building, its interior design and spatial configuration, and in relationship to other objects, which may or may not be functionally related. In addition, these sources also connect objects to people and place the artefact in a contemporaneous social and ideological matrix, which on discard is frequently ruptured. The issue has been defined as the ‘equifinality’ of archaeological evidence, where the recoverable material culture can only remain a sample of past reality.[3]

As in the case of the documentary records, the study of historic objects in contemporary pictorial representations is not without its risks and pitfalls. Where perhaps until the early 20th century it  might have been assumed that the paintings of, say, the Dutch Golden Age were to some extent representations of everyday life, today we acknowledge a multilayered understanding of their function as contemporary depictions, which were informed by a wide variety of cultural, social and moral motivations. Erwin Panofsky (1892–1968) was the first to interpret Jan van Eyck’s Anolfini Portrait (1434) not only a depiction of a wedding ceremony, but also a visual contract testifying to the act of marriage. Panofsky identifies a plethora of hidden symbols that all point to the sacrament of marriage. In his various iconological studies he identified at least three strata of meaning: primary of natural subject matter, secondary or conventional subject matter and tertiary or intrinsic meaning or content (iconology). In recent years, this approach has been refined particularly in respect of Netherlandish art by Eddy de Jongh and others, but Panofsky’s ‘’disguised’ symbolism is still very much influential in the study and understanding of northern European historic art.[4] The pictorial record of the transition to modernity acts as a window on the age, its materiality and its mentality; it holds a record not only of the multiplicity of things but also, essentially, a multiplicity of behaviours and thought, both of which determine quotidianity.[5]

In recognizing the value of contemporary iconographic sources for hermeneutics research in historical archaeology, it is important not to underestimate the importance of graphical evidence for empirical study, whether it be for dating or principally to help identify the active lives of historical artefacts. Our understanding of the use of silver-gilt and base metal dress hooks in 15th to 16th-century dress, which have become such a staple feature of the Portable Antiquities Scheme annual reports for England and Wales, would have been compromised without the series of portrait drawings by Hans Holbein the Younger of Henrician court figures and other secular studies, which show how they were used to close dress in the age before the button became ubiquitous. Late medieval panel painting commissioned for private devotion, particularly those that set the Lives of the Holy Family and those of the Saints in the contemporary domestic realm, reveal an increasing emphasis on material comfort illustrated by a wide range of utensils and rich furnishings. Robert Campin’s Annunciation triptych of c.1427–32 contains a wealth of domestic detail. Patrons (they are present here peeping through the ajar door of the chamber) were concerned to record as much of the paraphernalia of their own lives as a strategy to place the Saints into their own world and to participate in the sacred drama. The Annunciation by Petrus Christus of 1453[7] achieves a similar impact by foregrounding a contemporary utilitarian Rearen stoneware bottle to hold the sacred flowers of the Virgin. As Keith Moxey has previously noted, we are not dealing with ‘reality’ in these scenes, but rather a ‘reality effect’, which may be described as an ‘illusionist strategy of late medieval artists to represent the deployment of a visual rhetoric intended to make the Christian story both relevant and accessible to the majority of Christian believers…The miraculous powers ascribed to certain of these images depended upon a religious imagination that had been trained to infuse the natural with the supernatural’.[8]  The key to an archaeological appreciation of these sources is the recognition of the religious and social motivations of the depicted domestic ‘reality’.

This ‘bourgeois realism’ of Netherlandish and German art of the 15th to 16th centuries forms a rich vein for comparative historical study. The linen-draped table illustrated in Dieric Bouts’s Christ in the House of the Pharisee Simon of 1460 supports a selection of archaeologically-attested dining and drinking ware of the period, including Siegburg stoneware drinking jugs, glass beakers, table knives and pewter flatware, together with tableware that does not normally survive in the archaeological record, such as wooden trenchers.[9] The pictorial source is an essential iconographic reference for reconstructing the functional and social relationships of the various tableware media employed in burgher households of the period. Reconstruction of North German ‘Hanseatic ‘Wohnkultur’ depends on both the quantitative archaeological record of stoneware frequencies and a comparative-qualitative analysis of contemporaneous iconographic images that records the non-archaeological or ‘missing artefacts’. The Haarlem painters Jakob Jansz in his depiction of the Holy Family at a Meal of c.1495–1500[10] (Fig. 1a) and Jan Mostaert in his Joseph explaining the Dreams of the Baker and the Cupbearer of c.1500[11]  (Fig. 1b) set the scriptural drama firmly in the contemporary domestic setting of the urban mercantile households of the North Netherlands. In both the white linen-draped table is central to the action. Siegburg stoneware drinking vessels share the table with wooden and pewter flatware. In the Joseph narrative the main character holds an ornate pewter wine flagon. With their detailed representations of merchant house interiors and the precise and relative location of domestic utensils within the space, these images are amongst the most evocative visual documents of dining culture amongst the emerging middle classes of the period, in which we see a range of media of differing value sharing a social interaction. The ‘reality effect’ of these scenes is of profound significance to the social archaeology of North West European merchant communities, enabling a reconstruction of ‘Lebenswelt’ through the cross examination of the synchronous material and visual documentary records. The dressed and laid table is a central feature of Netherlandish religious art through into the 17th century and a continuing rich source of economic, social and cultural information on domestic objects for the historical archaeologist. The Utrecht painter Mechtelt toe Boecop’s Last Supper of 1576 is an example of the Renaissance influence on the genre (Fig. 2).[12] Here we observe a mounted Cologne-Frechen style Bartmann jug being used as a drinking jug on the table and a mounted Cologne-style Bartmann pitcher being used as a wine or water decanter placed below the table. Once again the Rhenish stoneware, which has a ubiquitous archaeological distribution,[13]  is depicted in a ‘live’ situation alongside the clear Venetian-style glass beaker, pewter ware, table knives, spoons and treen on a bleached white table cloth, all of which are missing or at best rare in the excavated record. The visual snapshot of the ‘active life’ of an archaeological object is of great interest despite the illusionary historical reality of a biblical event.

Low Countries painting of the 16th century comprises a series of religious, mythical and secular themes set in the domestic sphere that feature well-attested archaeological objects prominently and create a rich functional and social matrix for the study of everyday ritual (‘Wohnkultur’). Marten van Heemskerck’s portrait of the Haarlem patrician family of Pieter Jan Foppeszoon of 1530 is among the earliest representations of a wealthy merchant family.[14] The seating around a dressed and laid table emphasizes the centrality of table culture in defining the ideal of the early modern family. In addition to the exotic foods, the pewter flagon, glassware and silver chalice sets the social bar for this generation of burgher family art. Pieter Aertsen’s Christ in the House of Martha and Mary of 1553[15]  and Jan Beuckelaer’s Four Elements of 1570[16]  are set in the kitchens of urban merchant houses and illustrate a wide range of contemporary kitchen and table ceramics, glass and metalware scattered around the floors, on tables and suspended from the walls. These narrative scenes are highly theatrical representations of domestic reality but it is worth pausing to observe the relative locational relationships within the various spaces. It is notable that the red earthenware cooking ware is usually depicted on the floor and that the mounted stoneware, glassware and, in the case of the Aertsen, the Antwerp maiolica vase, are placed on the tables and is prominent positions. As in the late Middle Ages, the artist’s objective was to attempt to involve the patron and viewer in the action, the semblance of reality amplified by the depiction of real objects chosen to fulfill a precise function and social role.

Images expressing overt satire are not without interest for the archaeologist. An engraving of around 1540–6 depicting drunken Bacchus Singers after Hieronymous Bosch at a feast is a moral critique of indulgent excess.[17]  The mock ‘playing’ of a glass flute and stoneware pitcher placed on the table represents the breaking of taboos in manners. Thus the deliberate misuse of real objects in a domestic ritual situation for social satire provides a further insight into the popular perceptions of those objects in early modern society. Pieter Breughel’s well known Peasant Wedding of 1568 is a further case in point.[18]  The baskets of unmounted stoneware pitchers and drinking jugs emphasise the social milieu being satirized by the artist. To amplify the effect and the critique of excess, the stoneware vessels are foregrounded and depicted at a slightly enhanced scale. The illusionist purpose of the scene is of particular hermeneutic value to the social archaeologist dealing with commonplace archaeological objects. Late medieval woodcut technology fulfilled a number of purposes, including the demand for cheap pedagogic visual propaganda for the emergent urban burgher class. The scenes from Häusliche Erziehung (‘Domestic Instruction’), printed by Johan Bäumler in Augsburg in 1476, and reprinted in the Kinderbüchlein of Bartholomäus Metlinger (printed by Johann Schaur, Augburg, in 1500) are typical of the genre (Fig. 3),[19]  and in this scene showing the merchant and his industrious family we can observe the idealised ‘Ordnung’ of space and furnishings, fixtures and fittings, including beds, chairs, cradles, shelving chests, candelabra, hand-washing equipment, ceramics, glazing, even pets(!), and notably, the introduction of new technologies such as smokeless central heating (ceramic tile stove). Behind the idealised reality of the image, the relationships between the individual objects and between the people and objects enable us to help locate archaeological artefacts in the spatial and functional matrix of the historic household. Given the rarity of finding a tile-stove in situ in an urban building, such contemporary images are key to establishing the social and cultural milieu in which these objects were circulating and also to understanding their importance in the living space and how they functioned (i.e. set against a wall through which the stove was serviced and expelled its fumes). The ceramic tile-stove continued to be depicted as a centerpiece of social aspiration and domestic harmony in European burgher culture throughout the 16th century, as we can observe in an engraving representing January in a Months of the Year cycle by H.S. Beham of 1520 showing a wealthy patrician dining scene. Oil painting of the Dutch Golden Age, particularly works depicting the domestic interior and still life compositions, appears at first glance a compelling source of social and cultural information for archaeologists and all those studying the emerging materiality and mentalities of early modernity. After all, this is a truly vast documentary resource. On the basis of statistical analyses of inventories and the number of painters active in Holland, economic historians have calculated that Dutch painters produced over 5 million pictures of all genres during the 17th century.[21] Around 1640, about two thirds of the population of delft lived in homes with paintings, with an average of eleven works per household. Overall, most numerous were landscapes, followed by portraits and history paintings, but interiors and still-lifes made up close to 10 per cent, or about half a million works, mainly oil on canvas. These were aimed at the broad spectrum of middle class buying power. These paintings were not produced on commission but speculatively in the main, in the hope that customers would desire them. It is agreed that Dutch genre paintings are likely to have fostered demand for the modes of living and goods they presented in such radiant fashion.[22] This output was created and consumed by a society that saw dramatic advancements in its material circumstances during the 17th-century. Until the late 18th century the Dutch Republic enjoyed the highest standard of living in Europe; wages were higher and inflation non-existent. Not surprisingly homes were filled by a vast range of fashionable and luxurious commodities, many reflecting overseas commercial contact.[23] Pieter de Hooch’s Interior with Women beside a linen chest of 1663[24] and Cornelis de Mann’s Family at a Dinner table of 1665–70[25] depict the new domestic luxuries of the mid-century – the ebony-inlaid linen press (replacing the chest), the starched white table napery (replacing the spittoon and the hand) and garnitures of white faience and silverware are emblematic of the new wealth of the nation and forewarning of excess.

The ideal of home and conceptions of the early modern nuclear family in its intimacy, domestic comfort and luxury amongst the north-west European urban middle classes can be seen to crystallize in 17-century Dutch genre art. Crucially, the illusionist effect is amplified by the presence of people in the scenes, and where there are no people, such as in the still-life, the scene is clearly habitable. The interaction between space, object and person is key to our archaeological interest in reconstructing these functional and symbolic relationships. The contextual opportunities offered by the depictions of the domestic interior for the socio-economic investigation of synchronous excavated assemblages are as significant as the historic probate inventory or testament.

The 17th-century Dutch home was both a private place and the showcase for the family’s values, status, wealth and taste. The choice of pictures on the wall was an important way for the household to project its self-image while affirming its investment in the values of the wider community. Scenes of daily life placed the home and family on display as ‘a way of imagining, reinforcing and crafting an ideal of domestic order and virtue.[26] The naturalistic genre gave this community a virtual mirror image of itself, but we recognize that the highly idealised and selective reflection it saw was perhaps more about the way it aspired to be than the way it really was. Thus Dutch genre scenes of the 17th century were not intended as mimetic representations of social reality. They were in part aspirational visions of the successful burgher lifestyle and part exercise in moral edification, employing a figurative language that everyone would have recognised. Although not a directly relevant painting for detailed archaeological cross-analysis, the Account Book, by Jan Steen of the early 1660s in The Hunterian, University of Glasgow,[27]  provides a case-study in the depiction and arrangement of people and domestic objects for the purpose of moral instruction (Fig. 4). The woman seated to the right outside a tavern is a one of Steen’s dissolute women, if not a prostitute. The old lady in the middle is a procuress and the lady in the headscarf to the left is a tradeswoman who has come to present her pofboek and remind her customer of her debt. The woman is just ahead of the procession of townspeople who are about to expose her scandalous state. The harbour is a reminder of the brothel’s best source of customers. The various objects in the scene all help to condemn the prostitute: her blouse is undone, an indication of low morals (and she is not breast-feeding her son!); the spinning wheel, a symbol of good housekeeping, is neglected; as is the child who is too large for its kinderstoel (he is spoilt, having three dolls and his tin feeding bottle has fallen neglected to the ground); the bird cage is an allusion to intercourse and to a libidinous lifestyle – Vogelen in Dutch is to fornicate – (its position within the image makes it a sign for the brothel); the vine is a symbol of the consumption of alcohol and of associated lewd behaviour; the rose in the pot behind the prostitute is the flower of Venus and the thorns a reminder of the dangers involved; the bucket would have been used to bring back goods from the market, but lies empty because the prostitute’s credit has run out; and the gourd on the belt of the tradeswoman is the symbol of brevity (as a proverbially fast-growing plant it symbolised the rapid flowering and passage of feminine beauty). One can decode the domestic mayhem of Jan Steen’s various depictions of the Dissolute Household (1663–65) or In Luxury Beware (1663) along similar lines.[28] Steen was renowned deliberately inverting the appropriate familial behavior of scenes by Pieter de Hooch and others by minutely cataloging the effects of intemperance as they reverberate through the household. The reckless abuse of luxury Delftware dishes, pewter plates and jugs and glassware tipping from the table or lying on the floor amplify the didactic effect of this study in the transgression of the social utility of fine table wares. Many Dutch genre painters treated the domestic interior as a world of women, children and maids.[29] In Dutch society fathers may have ruled but they are often strikingly absent from scenes of domestic life. Nicolaes Maes created a number of ‘female interiors’ with mothers with children and maids at their chores in the 1650s. While The Lacemaker [30] appears to record an authentic scene of quotidian domesticity, with the child’s delft porringer on the floor alongside its overturned pewter feeding bottle and the (antique) Siegburg stoneware wine jug placed strategically out of reach on the adjacent table, Maes’s depiction of maids and their mistresses is altogether more critical. In the Idle Servant of 1655 we see a sleeping maid with hand to chin, and her mistress suggesting she is not worn out from work but has succumbed to sloth or idleness, the state of female melancholics caused by lovesickness (Fig. 5).[31] Maes capitalised on the widespread belief that maidservants were lazy and lascivious, prone to petty thievery and a threat to the stable household.[32] For the archaeologist, there is significant interest in the mixed assemblage of base metal and lead-glazed red earthenware cooking and food preparation vessels together with the delft plates and dishes scattered over the floor awaiting washing up or replacing on shelves. Note also the stacked blue-and-white Wan-Li-style delft dishes on the dresser. The mistress of the household is reduced to carrying the Westerwald stoneware decanter to the dining table herself! Notwithstanding the morality tale allegorised by this scene, the synchronology of the depicted kitchen and tableware provides a documented historical fix on the functional and social interrelationships of these recognisable archaeological objects whose excavated context is more likely to reflect the process of discard rather than use, or rather here misuse. As in the case of late medieval devotional art, the depiction of contemporaneous popular domestic products, such a Rhenish stoneware or Dutch delftware, in intimate genre scenes of the 17th century, serves to cement the illusion of real time and space, together with social milieu and the moral message. Cobalt-painted Westerwald stoneware jugs and tankards are ubiquitous irrespective of the social setting and symbolic purpose of the subject. In Gerard ter Borch’s Lady Drinking with a Letter of 1665 we see a fine Westerwald wine decanter on a table alongside a Turkey carpet (Fig. 6).[33] The Lady drinks from a crystal glass and is dressed in fine silk; whereas In Nicolaes Maes’s Old Woman Praying of 1655–58 the old woman’s utilitarian dress, the mix of earthenware pipkin, Westerwald stoneware tankard, and meal of gruel, cheese and fish radiate pious frugality.[34] It is their precise depiction and positioning within the social and ideological matrix of these imagined domestic scenes that we gain an insight into the ‘active lives’ of these archaeologically familiar Rhenish stoneware vessels.

Still lifes of domestic commodities and foodstuffs are another key strand within the genre of 17th-century Dutch secular painting and a mechanism for reflecting the purchasing power, social aspirations and moral concerns of the community.[35] In addition, the technological and commercial pulses of the Dutch Golden Age and its consumer excess are emphasised: the exotic fruits, wines, spices, and later coffee and tea; the Venetian glassware; seashells from the Indian Ocean; porcelain from China and tobacco from America – all contribute to an unprecedented impression of luxury and novelty in the domestic sphere created by the Dutch lead in the new global economy. Many ‘sumptuous still lifes’ (Pronk-stilleven) were commissioned explicitly to show off (‘pronken’), one’s purchasing power. In Osias Beert’s Still Life with Cherries and Strawberries of 1608[36]  we observe the social impact of the first Amsterdam auctions of Chinese porcelain in 1602 and 1604. It is significant that at the start of the century we see exotic Chinese ‘Kraak’ porcelain being combined with luxury precious metal and Mediterranean crystal glassware. The relevant regional archaeological sequence for the period, such as that documented at the town of Duisburg on the confluence of the Rhine and Ruhr, reveals the relatively exclusive social distribution of the early imported Chinese porcelains in the community during the early 17th century, with several large dishes being excavated on the sites of patrician houses.[37] The sequence also records the immediate impact of these exotic imports on regional ceramic manufacture. A new range of imitative products were made in Netherlands tin-glazed earthenware local utilitarian red earthenware potters in the Lower Rhineland were stimulated into inventing slipware for the table. But during the course of the 17th century, with the accelerated importation of Chinese porcelain by the shipload, the social value matrix of this commodity may have changed yet again. In Jan Jansz Treck’s Still Life of 1649,[38] the Chinese blue-and-white porcelain bowl is part of a mixed table group containing pewter and a ‘forest glass’ beer flute. Archaeologically, however, Chinese blue-and white porcelain remains relatively elusive in the North-West European excavation record until the end of the century and it possible that the iconographic representations reflect an idealisation of the domestic table setting in the burgher household.[39]

General developments in consumer taste in the domestic sphere can be documented through Dutch genre painting over the course of the 17th century and it is possible to identify fashion trends in a number of key material categories. One candidate for future calibration of iconographic and archaeological data is tin-glazed earthenware, which occurs abundantly in both records. The trend in this sector towards plain white wares from the middle of the 17th century onwards can be traced archaeologically as in Duisburg[40]  and in the home interiors of Pieter de Hooch, such as the Mother Nursing an Infant of 1658–60.[41] Here large lobed whiteware dishes are displayed prominently on the mantelpiece and it appears, given their importance, that in such orderly households they may have been be removed only on special occasions. Whitewares held a special place within Dutch society of the period. White was associated with purity and household cleanliness; hence the emphasis on starched white napery, white plaster walls and white tiles. It acted as a metaphorical antidote to polychromy and excessive ornament, which could be associated with profligacy and vanity.

The symbolic representation of modesty is a long standing theme in Dutch genre art and it is vital to recognize that on occasion the purchasing power of a particular household is being purposefully underplayed. Hendrick Sorgh’s 1663 portrait of the Bierens family is unusual for posing the family in the kitchen apparently engaged in some communal cooking.[42] Head of the house, Jacob Bierens, enters holding a fish, but he was no fisherman and would not have been in charge of the shopping. But for this Mennonite family, the Lenten food must have ciphered frugality and everyone is participating diligently, while the eldest son is providing musical accompaniment to emphasize the harmony of family life. It is quire deliberate, therefore, that no exotic or elaborately decorative household goods are depicted. Notwithstanding all the metaphorical grammar of this scene, it is a rich source of information on kitchen operations in a merchant home of the period, and contains important detail on food preparation and washing up procedures. One detail is of particular contextual resonance to he historical archaeologist. A row of blue-and-grey Westerwald stoneware panel-jugs hangs on pegs in the background above the sink, ready for use, as they do above the old lady spinning in the painting of the same name by Nicholaes Maes’s (1650–60).[43] The neatly suspended jugs reflect order and tidiness, either in the bustling merchant household or in back-of-house light industrial setting. Westerwald jugs account for around 6 percent of all ceramics excavated on the Lower Rhineland urban sites during the second half of the century.[44] This practical and effective method of storage may help to explain why a relatively modest number of such highly decorated vessels may have entered the archaeological record. We do not actually need historic paintings to inform us about the consumption of tobacco in early modern Europe. Notwithstanding the comprehensive archaeological picture, rarely can we observe the ritual of smoking in the excavated record. Pieter van Anraadt’s still-life ensemble of 1658 combines all the paraphernalia of the new recreational habit – the clay pipes, tobacco wrapper, red earthenware smoking pot together with the essential Westerwald stoneware beer jug and drinking glass (Fig. 7).[45] This is a scene of private contemplative consumption of the fruits of the Dutch trade to the New World and intended as a deliberate counterpoint to contemporary tavern scenes showing the abuse of such commodities and the negative effect of alcohol and nicotine on the social order. The figurative art of the late medieval to early modern domestic interior in north western Europe represents a primary resource for the exploration of the economic, social, material and ideological changes in contemporary culture that define the emergence of Western modernity. Cross-referencing this rich visual record of change with the evidence of archaeological distributions of the domestic artefacts that populate and animate these scenes has the potential to create a powerful interpretative tool for investigating consumer habits and trends and aspects of social behaviour amongst groups in society that did most to create the world we now recognize as a modern one. The pictorial sources in question, from pre-Reformation devotional works to the sumptuous still-life paintings of the Dutch Golden Age were never intended as mimetic studies in social reality. They were in part aspirational visions of the lifestyle of the emerging urban mercantile elite, in part exercises in social engineering, and in part templates for religious and moral edification, each employing a symbolic visual grammar that the middle class owners of this art would have recognised. Domestic buildings, interiors and utilitarian objects operate within this complex matrix of motivations and enhance the crucial ‘reality effect’ for the viewer. We are conscious of the illusionist purpose of these works but, once decoded, we recognize their scope for interdisciplinary historical research into the materiality of the age of transition.

European historical archaeology involves reconciling material and documentary sources of evidence for the past, which escalates in its mass and complexity from the 15th century onwards. For the late Middle Ages and early modern period we have long recognised the importance of addressing the contemporaneous written record and are aware of the frequent correspondences and conflicts between artefact and text. The pictorial record offers a parallel investigative mechanism but poses many of the same challenges: it is partial and biased but it contains many of the disarticulated and decontextualised archaeological objects that concern us. Most significantly, and perhaps more explicitly than the text-based sources, it locates them in relation to spaces, people and to other objects. Artefacts help enforce the illusion of reality and play an emblematic role in the action.

Although we as archaeologists have long recognised the importance of the historic pictorial record, our methodologies and hermeneutic devices have not been deployed sufficiently to exploit this rich comparative resource for better understanding the use of objects, their interrelationships, and their position in the social, cultural and ideological matrix of historical society.  As the paintings and prints show us, objects were of critical importance to delivering a social, religious or moral message. Even the most utilitarian of objects held symbolic power in the visual documentary world. The prospect of structured archaeological-art historical comparative research offers new opportunities for exploring the ‘Lebenswelt’ – the lifestyles and mentalities of the early modern household and community. This short survey can only hint at the possibilities offered by such a study. The need to pilot surveys of particular genres, artistic themes or the works of individual artists and to test some of our archaeological data and assumptions is as urgent now as it was ten or twenty years ago. If we don’t address this challenge at some defined point in the future we risk continuing to plough our own single disciplinary furrow and fail in our ambition to develop a true historical archaeology of the early modern domestic sphere. Worse still, much of our excavated material will remain orphaned and only of interest to other archaeologists.
Landscape painting enjoyed an international reputation at the art academies both in Dresden and Düsseldorf especially during the first half of the nineteenth century.[1] It had already achieved a significant position in Dresden at the beginning of the century where the academy also attracted students outside German speaking countries, for instance from Norway, but its eminence declined towards mid-century.[2] In Düsseldorf, the status of landscape painting started to rise when Wilhelm von Schadow (1788–1862) was appointed the director of the academy in 1826.[3] Von Schadow’s favourable attitude towards landscape painting was manifested in two major actions: Soon after his arrival, von Schadow established a class for landscape painting, and in 1836 he appointed Johann Wilhelm Schirmer (1807–1863) as the professor for landscape painting. Schirmer introduced open-air painting and stressed the importance of making studies after nature. In comparison, landscape painting had a minor role at the academies in Berlin and Munich during the first half of the century – apart from a few exceptions, such as Karl Friedrich Schinkel (1781–1841), Carl Blechen (1798–1840) and Carl Rottmann (1797–1850).[4]  However, the significance of landscape painting in Berlin and Munich started to rise in the mid-19th century.[5]

During the first half of the nineteenth century, German landscape art, whether practised in Dresden or Düsseldorf, has been characterized as diverse and fragmented. It was typical that landscape themes and styles varied widely. When reviewing German landscape art of this time, a lot of emphasis has been placed on the term Romanticism and, in the same context, on the depiction of mood. The artworks have been regarded as expressions of the inner world of the artists, and their relation to Romantic poetry has been discussed. Apart from this, the concept of fragment, one of the key terms of German Romanticism, appears very often in the discourse, and its different meanings have been covered.[6]

This paper discusses the relationship between geology and landscape painting in Dresden and Düsseldorf ca. 1780−1860. The focus is on the landscape north of the Alps; therefore, artworks depicting Italy and the ideal or classical modes will not be discussed as they constitute a different group. As has been convincingly shown, German landscape painting, just like poetry, carries references to geology and geography and their developments in the nineteenth century. This issue has been studied more widely concerning landscape painting in Dresden from the turn and the first decades of the century, whereas later events in Düsseldorf less.[7]  Likewise, the connection between Dresden’s and Düsseldorf’s geological interest in arts has attracted little attention.  In this discourse, however, in order to obtain an overlook, it is necessary to discuss the developments in Dresden at the turn of the century first since it provides background for later events. First, I outline major advances in geology at the beginning of the nineteenth century. After that I take a closer look into Alexander von Humboldt’s (1769−1859) role.  When talking about German arts, a few words have to be said about Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749−1832). Two other important figures from this period are Carl Gustav Carus (1789−1869), a physician, a naturalist, an amateur artist and a theoretician of landscape painting who acted mostly in Dresden, and Johann Wilhelm Schirmer (1807–1863), professor for landscape painting both in Düsseldorf and in Karlsruhe.  Finally, I use the valley of Neandertal as an example of this geological interest.

The temporal scope of this paper is determined by four factors: First, the developments in natural sciences from the end of the eighteenth through the beginning of the nineteenth century led to the separation of geology and geography as two distinctive disciplines. This coincides with the emergence of landscape painting in Dresden. Secondly, the year 1859 witnessed the death of two major German naturalists: Alexander von Humboldt and Carl Ritter (1779–1859), as well as the publication of Charles Darwin’s (1809−1882) Origin of the Species which converted the world to evolutionism. In addition, Wilhelm von Schadow resigned from the academy in the same year. His resignation is said to have started the slow decline of the academy.[8]

Today, we are inclined to consign art and science to separate epistemologies, whereas a different relationship between art and science prevailed in the nineteenth century. This trend can be seen, for example, in landscape painting from Germany, England and the United States. Geology and landscape painting were closely allied in the United States, especially between 1825 and 1875, and, in fact, landscape painters and geologists stood on common ground where a close study and observation of nature constituted an essential part of their work.[9] Artists were not only caught up by the geological enthusiasm of the time, but they also participated in geological expeditions, and their task, apart from artistic work, was to document and illustrate the findings of naturalists.[10] In addition, the artworks served the purposes of other social endeavours of the time, for instance, nationalism, nation-building, as well as tourism.[11]

When talking about geology as an independent discipline in the modern sense, it did not exist yet because the gradual separation of geography and geology took place during the nineteenth century. As to geography, it had been, more or less, used in describing the earth listing and classifying its physical objects and phenomena up to 1800; thus, we talk about descriptive geography. Geology, on the other hand, had been concerned with collecting items, for example, for private purposes in mineral and curiosity cabinets. Nevertheless, people started to think about the earth and its relationship to its human inhabitants in a new way around 1800. This development shows, first of all, in landscape painting in Dresden at the beginning of the century, and after that it is reflected in landscape painting in Düsseldorf. The nineteenth century is regarded as the heroic age of science as this was the time when the outline of the earth’s history was drawn. The earth’s age expanded from the biblical timescale of a few thousand years, as told in the book of Genesis, to several billions of years.[12] The English concept of ‘scientist’[13] was launched in 1840 by the English scientist and philosopher William Whewell  (1794-1866). Scientists started to organize and establish different societies in order to promote the status of science. They emphasized human reasoning and wanted to get rid of superstition. According to the British Historian of Science, Peter J. Bowler, science supported a materialistic notion of nature, which also served the needs and purposes of industrialization.[14] One of the reasons for geology to develop as a specific science was industrialization, and especially mining industry. Hence, geology blossomed as one of the most popular sciences, especially in the United States, and it appealed not only due to economic reasons, but also recreational, intellectual, nationalistic and religious reasons.[15] The same reasons seem to apply to its popularity in Europe.

There were, however, other trends at the time of industrialization, such as Romanticism, which abandoned the commercial and materialistic approach, and emphasized the spiritual aspect of nature and the importance of the human mind. According to Romantic thinking, the idea of nature was not only a result of our sensations of the outer world, but also of how our mind tries to understand these sensations.[16] Along with Romanticism, there existed Naturphilosophie, a Romantic philosophy of nature, whose followers believed in the fundamental unity of nature. They thought that instead of studying separate objects one should conceive the various phenomena and powers of nature as different manifestations of a single underlying and all-embracing cause.[17] Religion was another important factor which greatly impacted artists’ as well as naturalists’ idea of nature. Although many geologists, including Charles Darwin, were trying to liberate geology from the biblical timescale and from the creation story as stated in the book of Genesis, many artists held onto conservative geology which evidenced that God’s shaping hand could be found in the fabric of the earth.[18]

Before the foregoing developments, there existed a battle between two competing hypotheses on how the earth’s surface was formed in the eighteenth century:  Neptunism and Plutonism (or Vulcanism). Prior to 1770, the earth was considered static and fairly young. The German mineralogist Abraham Gottlob Werner (1750−1817), who was teaching at the Bergakademie, the mining school in Freiberg, Saxony, supported Neptunism which asserted that the earth’s was originally covered by water, and its crust had been formed in stages out of a primordial ocean with each stage represented by a distinct rock formation. Neptunism was supported by so called catastrophists many of whom believed that the Flood in the Bible was a geological fact which could be proved. In the course of the nineteenth century, Neptunism, however, was replaced by Vulcanism (or Plutonism) as a dominant intellectual theory.  According to Vulcanism, the earth was formed by fire from volcanic activity.  In 1830, the English geologist Charles Lyell (1797−1875) introduced the concept of nature’s uniformity; according to his theory, the surface of the earth was in constant transformation, and the supporters of this theory were called uniformitarians. Lyell’s ideas changed the direction of geology, but the German naturalist and explorer Alexander von Humboldt gave his ideas common currency. As a consequence, by 1840 the understanding of the earth and its history expanded almost beyond imaginable by 1840, and the most important concept discussed at mid-19th century was geological time.[19]

Alexander von Humboldt did not only describe nature and the earth, but emphasized, along with Goethe, the experience of nature. Thus, he stated that nature had to be felt, and the guiding principle for Humboldt’s study of nature was Totaleindruck, which meant the total impression, or more precisely, viewing nature as a whole. [20] Humboldt also adopted the concept of ‘total impression of landscape’ and the ‘organic wholeness of landscape’ from Goethe. He explained natural phenomena without religious dogma, not as God’s creation, which was common then, reverting to empirical science.[21] Interestingly, Humboldt’s total impression of landscape could not be divided into a subject and an object. Morevover, we can say that Humboldt introduced landscape aesthetics into science. He did not approach nature from a scientific point of view only as he was convinced that landscape poetry and landscape painting were important when studying nature. Humboldt also combined the empirical observation of the topographic features of the earth, which Werner called ‘geognosy’ − an older term for geology − with an artistic depiction of the landscape. The main concept Landschaft, landscape, referred not only to a concrete area, but also to the picture of the area obtained through observation. Humboldt proclaimed a new science in which the study of relationships replaced pure description, and he also regarded an artist’s trial to express the total impression of landscape as a guideline for a scientist who tries to comprehend the variety of natural relationships contained in landscape.[22]

Additionally, Carl Ritter, Humboldt’s friend, colleague and a professor at Berlin University, challenged natural scientists to enrich their detailed observations of nature by considering the whole instead of parts. In 1859, when both Humboldt and his colleague Ritter died, big changes took place in geography and geology. Charles Darwin published his Origin of Species starting a new era in geology. Humboldt’s idea of holistic landscape observation was abandoned, and his rich labours were overshadowed by Darwin. At the end of the eighteenth century, the attitude towards mountains changed from mostly being regarded as laborious to cross obstacles, as well as representing something frightening and awe-inspiring to acquiring new qualities, such as sublime, beautiful and picturesque. The sublime was connected to having an attractive experience which evoked strong emotions in the spectator when facing the awesome forces of nature. Nonetheless, in order to be an attractive experience, the spectator needed to be reassured that he or she was not in mortal danger.[23]  After all, it was not only the aesthetic qualities of mountains, which stimulated interest, but also the ever-growing interest in nature study and geology. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe reflects the changing interest in the mountains. Goethe, who represents a ‘Jack of all trades’ of his time due to his large variety of interests and pursuits, was not a naturalist − a scientist in the modern sense – but he took great interest in natural history of the time, and in his writings he dealt with meteorology, botany but also geography and geology. Both in his city residence and in his garden house in Weimar,[24]  he possessed a collection of stones, a mineral cabinet, which demonstrates his great interest in geology.

Goethe combines his different fields of interest in the description of the mountains he had seen in his travel diary, Italian Journey (Italienische Reise), which tells about his Grand Tour to Italy (1787−1788).[25] On this tour, Goethe travelled through the Alps, and he describes the colours, the forms and structure of the mountains as well as different kinds of rocks he saw.[26]  Later on his trip in Italy, Goethe was fascinated by volcanoes and the emergence of lava.[27] However, he does not only talk about the climate, the atmosphere or the humidity in the context of mountains, but also pays attention to the flora using the Swedish naturalist Carl von Linné’s (1707−1778) terminology. Here his attention is caught by the same fact as Alexander von Humboldt’s (1769−1859) as he talks about the influence of the height on the diversity of plants on the mountains.[28] The Grand Tour did not influence his poetry right away, but it widened his views on natural sciences which can be noted in several writings.[29] For instance, he wrote about mineralogy and geology, and compared the ideas of Neptunism and Vulcanism to the emergence of basalt.[30] In Faust, he even had Mephistopheles and Faust discuss the emergence of the earth where they took a stand for or against Neptunism and Vulcanism.[31] In addition, he took great in interest in the nature of granite and described its varying features.[32] It is also noteworthy that, after his trip, Goethe visited A. G. Werner at Freiberg on 16 September 1789.[33]   Goethe’s interest in geography and geology reflected also on his poetry, and a new poetic discourse on landscape emerged at the turn of the century.[34] The same trend can be recognized in landscape painting where a new approach to landscape was introduced through geology:  artists started to depict not only mountains, but also smaller details, such as boulders, stones and rock formations. Numerous artworks depicting topographic formations of the earth’s crust can be connected with this trend. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, Dresden was staged as the cultural scene for German Romanticism, and the city attracted many artists, poets, naturalists and philosophers. An important meeting point for their social gatherings was the literary and musical salon of the German jurist Christian Gottfried Körner (1756−1831). Körner’s salon was visited by most prominent visitors of the time: there were, for instance, Friedrich Schiller (1759−1805), Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1756−1791), Friedrich von Hardenberg (1772−1801), aka Novalis , August Wilhelm Schlegel (1767−1845) and his brother Friedrich Schlegel (1772−1829), Heinrich von  Kleist (1777–1811). From my point of view, however, the most interesting visitors were Goethe, the brothers Alexander and Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767−1835) as well as the Norwegian-born naturalist and philosopher Henrik Steffens (1773−1845).[35] On account of the many-faceted visitor’s list of Körner’s salon, one can assume that there existed lively interaction between arts and sciences including geology.  Further, Körner’s son, Theodor, studied at the Bergakademie in Freiberg 1808−1810, and the family possessed some of A. G. Werner’s works as well as a small mineral cabinet.[36]

In 1814, Carl Gustav Carus arrived in Dresden. Carus provides an excellent example of a person dealing with both science and art; therefore, he could be regarded as a link between science and art, and more precisely, between science and landscape painting. Apart from his other jobs and activities, Carus was also a scientific illustrator who used drawing as an aid to his medical and scientific research and publication. In his later writings, Carus predicted a great future for landscape painting by combining art with science.[37] He was Caspar David Friedrich’s friend (1774−1840), and Friedrich instructed Carus in landscape painting. As a consequence, Carus painted several landscapes in the spirit of Friedrich between 1817−1827, such as Osterspazierganz (1822) and Blick vom Montanvert auf die Montblanc-Gruppe (1822−1824).[38] However, Carus became famous for his Nine Letters on Landscape Painting (Neun Briefe über Landschaftsmalerei), which he wrote in the years 1815–1824, exploring the aims of landscape painting. The early letters 1–5 have been interpreted as reflecting Friedrich’s influence and his views on art. And yet, the sixth letter took a turn since Carus had read Goethe’s essay and poem on cloud forms, and they set his ideas about landscape free.[39] In the eighth letter, Carus clearly listed what was wrong with the landscape painting of his time and emphasized the importance of ‘teaching laws that govern nature in its outward forms’.[40] His aesthetic approach to nature and landscape changed during the years 1821–1823, and, accordingly, the subjectivity of the first letters gave way to objective knowledge based on natural sciences.[41] Thus, he became aware of the importance of scientific laws even in seemingly random and wilful nature.

Carus sought for Goethe’s appreciation as a scientist, a theoretician of landscape painting and a painter. He had also reverted to Goethe’s physiognomic and morphologic method, the notion of Urphänomen, archetypel phenomenon, which was widely used around 1800.[42] According to this method, the whole was present in every part, and then again every part was connected to the whole. Apart from Goethe, Carus admired Alexander von Humboldt and especially Humboldt’s ability to make science understandable for the general public. Carus introduced a new purpose for landscape painting, which he called Erdleben-Bildkunst, earth-life painting, in which the artist’s eye had to be trained ‘to perceive nature in its divine, essential life and in its forms; for wherever the eye perceives clearly and purely the hand cannot help but follow and develop in skill’.[43] If the perceiver’s eye and the mind were not trained, nature seemed arbitrary and lawless. Thus, it was not possible to notice, for instance, the differences of outline between different species of trees.[44] Following Humboldt’s ideas of landscape painting, it was essential for Carus that young artists understood the connection between the forms of mountains and their structure, the causal relationship between the locality and its flora, the laws that governed plant growth, and the laws of atmospheric phenomena. Thereafter, they had to learn the mysteries of light and its operation in the genesis of colour. It was also fundamental that artists understood the inner life of the object apprehending  what they were drawing.[45]  In order to achieve all this, young artists should have discussed with naturalists and read such books as Humboldt’s Views of Nature (Ansichten der Natur) (1808).[46]

As to Carus’s relation to geology, he became a member of the Mineralogische Gesellschaft, mineralogical society, which was founded by A. G. Werner, and in 1816 he visited Werner at the Bergakademie in Freiberg, in the Erzgebirge. Although Carus appreciated Werner’s contributions to mineralogy, he found Werner’s Neptunism old-fashioned.[47] Instead, he was introduced to the new intellectual theory, Vulcanism, by Werner’s two former students and major naturalists; Leopold von Buch and Alexander von Humboldt.[48] Carus’s interest in geology is clearly visible in his early drawings and landscapes in which he studied carefully different mountain forms, such as Geognostic Landscape: Katzenköpfe near Zittau (1820).[49] This picture’s origin stemmed from the trip Carus made through Riesengebirge in 1820 following in Caspar David Friedrich’s footsteps. Friedrich had been wandering there with his colleague Georg Friedrich Kersting (1785–1847) some ten years earlier. On this trip, Carus made several studies of geological formations aiming at detailed depiction. If compared to Friedrich, there is an interesting difference between Carus ‘s and Friedrich’s usage of sketches and studies composed on these trips. When Friedrich painted his Morgen in Riesengebirge (1811) using several studies and sketches made on different trips, Carus composed his Geognostic Landscape: Katzenköpfe near Zittau (1820) using only a single drawing.[50] In his Letters on Landscape Painting (Landschaftsbriefen), Carus writes about the ‘physiognomy of mountain ranges’, the idea he acquired from the differences he saw between the two mountain forms: the ‘Plutonic elevations’ in the Böhmische Mittelgebirge and the ‘great, tranquil lines of the granite in Erzgebirge’.[51] In order to be able to depict the physiognomy of some mountain ranges, it was important for Carus to be familiar with the natural forces that lay behind the evolutionary process. Thus, he described landscape painting as history painting of the earth which he later called Erleben-Bildkunst.[52]

Between 1846 and 1856, Carus wrote about the Nine Letters on Landscape Painting in his memoirs stating how there was a curious blend of science and art, and he combined his thoughts with Friedrich Schelling’s concept of Weltseele, the world soul, which was a single, endless organic whole of the universe.[53] Although in Carus’s thinking science was superior to art, he sought an alliance of artistic skill and scientific knowledge when depicting nature; and yet, they were both manifestations of divinity since the artistic goal and the subject of landscape painting was to comprehend nature as the revelation of divinity, the language of God.[54] For him, a picture had to be felt, not invented – this carries connotations of Humboldt’s ideas who, along with Goethe, emphasized the experience of nature. In the 1830s, Düsseldorf with its newly organised academy, der Köninglich Preuβische Akademie zu Düsseldorf, started to compete with Dresden in landscape painting. Johann Wilhelm Schirmer, appointed in 1833 as head of class for landscape painting at the academy and professor in 1836, introduced a new approach to landscape. In Germany, landscapists talked about Naturwahrheit, the truth of nature, and Schirmer emphasized the importance of making studies after nature using his studies as teaching material for students both in Düsseldorf and Karlsruhe.[55] Schirmer himself travelled a lot, not only in Germany, but also in France, Italy and Switzerland. Everywhere he composed studies after nature which depicted trees, plants, rocks, stones, waterfalls, streams. In his works, Schirmer showed interest towards geological details, too, a good example of which is provided by his studies of the chalkstone cliffs painted on the seashore at Etretat, Normandy, in 1836.[56]

In 1827, Schirmer founded the Landschaftliche Komponierverein, an association for composing landscapes, with his colleague Carl Friedrich Lessing (1808–1880).[57] In the beginning, their aim was to tour the surrounding areas of Düsseldorf and make detailed and faithful studies of nature, and to compose drawings, Kompositionen, based on sketches and studies made after nature, and then to introduce these Kompositionen at the Landschaftliche Komponierverein every fortnight.[58] They made their first trip to Altenberg in Bergisches Land in the summer of 1827, but later they travelled farther down the river Rhine to more distant places in the mountain ranges of Eifel and Harz. Lessing, in particular, took great interest in geology, and he even used the geological writings and the geognostische Karten, geological maps, of Jacob Nöggerath while travelling in Vulkaneifel, the volcanic area of the Eifel.[59] Lessing made several sketches and studies on these trips,[60]  and he used the landscapes from Eifel as a background for his historical paintings, such as in Belagerung (Siege, 1848)[61]. As a matter of fact, Schirmer and Lessing started a real walking boom in the city, as younger artists began establishing similar associations generating numerous sketches and studies after nature following Schirmer’s and Lessing’s suit.[62] It was also important make sketches and studies after nature during Hans Gude’s (1825−1903) professorship at the academy in Düsseldorf (1854−1862), and later in Karlsruhe (1864−1880). The tradition continued in Düsseldorf in the 1870s as well, and several Finnish artists,[63] who studied in Düsseldorf and Karlsruhe, took their paint boxes and set out to study nature in the neighbourhood of Düsseldorf, and farther along the river Rhine, in Ahrtal, the valley of the river Ahr, or the mountain ranges of Harz and Eifel.

Although at the beginning of the nineteenth century Dresden and Düsseldorf belonged to different German speaking kingdoms, one can assume that artists in Düsseldorf were familiar, not only with Goethe’s, but also with Carus’s writings. For example, Carus published an article in Kunst-Blatt 18 in 1837[64]  praising the inspiring influence of the exhibition of the Düsseldorf School for the artistic life in Dresden highlighting landscapes in particular. In 1855, he also met Johann Wilhelm Schirmer in person in Dresden.[65] It is also noteworthy that Carus adopted the method of drawing Kompositionen with charcoal from Schirmer. The valley of Neandertal (older spelling Neanderthal), or Gesteins or Hundsklipp, as it was also called before mid-19th century, is located some 13 km east of Düsseldorf, between the towns Erkrath and Mettman. (Fig. 1 and 2). The valley was originally a limestone gorge of which its rugged scenery, waterfalls and caves provided excellent opportunities for painting trips. It was, in fact, often compared with Via Mala in Switzerland. Neandertal was named after the priest and head master of the local Lateinschule, Joachim Neander (1650−1680), who went to compose lyrics for hymns in the valley in the seventeenth century. Already at the beginning of the nineteenth century, artists found their way to the surrounding areas of Neandertal to celebrate the spring. They gathered there with families and friends, and one of the popular places for their festivities was the cave Neanderhöhle.[67] Schirmer tells vividly in his Jugenderinnerungen, memoirs of the youth, about a party in 1826 arranged for artists in Neandertal.[68] At the academy in Düsseldorf, it was actually Schirmer and Lessing who found the valley first. After the establishment of their landscape painting association in 1827, Schirmer and Lessing frequently sought their way to the valley. Later as a teacher, Schirmer took his students from the academy to work and study there. One of the popular motifs in Neandertal was a rock called Rabenstein which is about 100 m high. Artists often depicted it from the same direction as Schirmer’s pencil drawing Rabenstein in Neandertal (1826−27)[69] with the river Düssel running at its foot. Using the same view but from the opposite direction, Werner Holmberg, the first prominent Finnish artist who went to study landscape painting in Düsseldorf in 1853, painted a watercolour in 1857, Autumnal landscape from the neighbourhood of Düsseldorf[70]. In the very same year, a group of Finnish and Norwegian artists made a trip to Gesteins on the first of April. There were, among others, Adolph Tidemand’s (1814−1876) and Hans Gude’s families, Morten Müller (1828−1911), Erik Bodom (1829−ca.1879), Werner Holmberg and Anna Glad (1832−1909).Their outing was, however, interrupted by a thunderstorm which rose from behind the cliffs. While watching and admiring this play of nature, Holmberg and Glad, who had parted from the rest of the group, forgot to flee and were saturated. After this outing, Holmberg is said to have painted a picture from memory on the following day and given it to Glad, whom he married in 1858.[71]

On account of the story before, I would like to suggest that this picture of Gesteins at the Finnish National Gallery could be, in fact, from that outing in the spring. This is in contrast with what Hanna Eggerath has said about Holmberg’s watercolour.[72] I also assume that the title of the work is later, obviously given at the museum as there is no reference to Neandertal. The colours, nonetheless, refer to another season, but as Holmberg painted the scene in the spring from memory, he could have changed them. And when looking at the sky, it corresponds to what was told about the weather during the outing, as it ended with rain. In addition to this, Holmberg spent the summer of 1857 in Finland, and returned to Düsseldorf only at the end of October. While back in Düsseldorf, he eagerly started working on his studies from Finland, and there is no reference to any trip to Gesteins at this time of year in his letters.[73] And yet, one cannot deny that he could have made another painting trip to Neandertal in the autumn.

In the case of Holmberg, this was not the first time he had visited Neandertal , since he had spent the summer of 1854 in Erkrath with two Norwegian artists, Sophus Jacobsen (1833−1912) and Peter Arbo (1831−1892), as well as the Danish artist Johannes Wilhelm Zillen (1824−1870). They stayed in an old mill in Erkrath and made painting trips in the surroundings on foot. It was also easy to reach Neandertal from Erkrath. There is a sketch, Forest landscape with a masonry bridge leading over a stream (ca. 1854) which Jacobsen presumably made during this stay at Erkrath, and it obviously depicts the eastern entrance to the valley.[74]  Also Hans Gude, Holmberg’s private teacher in Düsseldorf, painted studies of Gesteins, for instance Forest study (1842)[75]. In this view, one can detect the white cliffs of the gorge in the background. In one of Holmberg’s sketch books, there is a very similar view.[76]

Apart from Rabenstein, there were other types of forest landscapes from Neandertal which the artists were fond of depicting. They drew and painted stones and rocks amidst tree roots, as well as the river Düssel, or small streams cascading over and between smooth-surfaced stones as well as rocks forming small waterfalls and ponds on their way. Sometimes they composed a larger view as Caspar Scheuren’s (1810−1887) Forest landscape (1845−1848)[77], or concentrated on more focused details. There are several later variations of similar motif by Finnish artists, such as Berndt Lindholm’s  (1841−1914) Brook (1868)[78], Fanny Churberg’s (1845−1892) Finnish landscape (1879)[79], and Oskar Kleineh’s (1846−1919) Brook in forest[80].

Today it is not possible to grasp the original atmosphere of Neandertal as the valley looks quite different due to large-scale mining that took place there in the mid-19th century. By the year 1900, the valley was completely destroyed, and only after the Second World War was the mining stopped.[81] The deep gorge carved by the river Düssel between the limestone cliffs does not exist anymore, but, instead, there are more gently descending slopes covered mostly by beech trees. There are some photos in the valley which show the barren landscape after the mining. With the help of the artists’ depictions of the place, we can, nonetheless, imagine what it looked like in the first half of the nineteenth century. When talking about industrialization and its disadvantages, there is another aspect to this: thanks to the mining, the bones of the Neandertal man were discovered by some Italian mine workers in 1856. One can only wonder if this could have happened otherwise. Landscape painting in Dresden and Düsseldorf was not based on the classical ideal only, where the painting represents the artist’s idea of the landscape according to this ideal. Parallel with this idealism, there was the artist’s work outdoors consisting of drawing and painting sketches as well as studies after nature.  Owing to this, a new kind of naturalism emerged. Also the changing interests and findings of the times was reflected in landscape painting, and the dominant role of religion started to give way to a more scientific approach in the mid-19th century.

The geological details in paintings do not act as a mere setting, but reflect the scientific ideas and findings of the time. The artworks are not to be looked at as pure scientific illustrations, but rather as artistic depictions of topographical and geological features which apply especially to the sketches and studies made after nature. At the same time, we must, however, bear in mind that artists worked together with scientists, for instance in the USA documenting landscapes. In general, there prevailed a similar contradiction between spiritual and materialistic values as today in the juxtaposition of picturesque and artistic landscape versus industrialization and mining. This is clearly apparent in the case of Neandertal.

Anne-Maria Pennonen, B. A. (Translation Studies); M. A. (Art History), is a doctoral student at Helsinki university, department of art history. She is writing her Ph. D. about landscape painting in Düsseldorf ca. 1850−1880, and its relation to the development of natural sciences, i.e. meteorology, geology, geography and botany. Apart from the developments in Germany, she is focusing on Finnish artists using Norwegian artists and their artworks as comparison material. 
The purpose of this article is to reflect on a certain kind of narratives as basic empirical material for my PhD thesis in progress, Eliminating the Other. Gender, Class and the Construct the Finnish Art in 1910’s and 1920’s. Here, I’m focusing on the recycled structure of the narrative, especially on two narratives concerning the art and the life of one of the cases in the study, the painter Juho Rissanen (1872–1950) who had his breakthrough around the turn of the century, in 1900. My point is that studying the biographical narratives of artists as empirical material is to analyze the construction of the discursive form of the history of art history; by means of letters, reviews and other archive material it is to deconstruct the myth of the artist (and possibly the myth of the artist as a genius) and of the evaluation process of his (her) art. It is examining the art historical canon and the narrator of the story, art historian or art critic, as the agent who produces value judgments through narratives.

Framing biographical narratives of the history of art history the study concentrates on a certain discursive form of western art history in use through centenaries, ever since the Florentine artist and writer Giorgio Vasari wrote his book Le Vite De’Più Eccellenti Architetti, Pittori et Scultori Italiani, first published in 1550, followed by an enlarged version in 1568.[1] There are links between the book of the Renaissance period and the evolutionary theory of the art. Although Vasari’s book has been the most influential compilation of artists and art history, it was not the first exposition of the history of Western European art. Vasari used many classical sources, for instance Pliny the Elder and Plutarch. For my research the challenging topic in the book is that of the shepherd connected with the 14th century painter Giotto, who, according to the narrative could ascend to the status of the big artist although he was a shepherd, uneducated but talented by nature.[2] However, it has been proved that the structure of the narrative is like a fairy-tale. In reality Giotto came from a Florentine family and never worked as a shepherd.[3] In the 1970’s, Hayden White examined historical narratives claiming that although narratives in biographies consist of neutral facts thought to match with reality, they are representations written by somebody. The structure of historical narratives is the same as that of fiction, even adding elements of comedy, tragedy, romance or satire.[4] Catherine M. Soussloff emphasizes that in the artist biographies there are anecdotes with multidimensional illusions.[5] Anecdotes tell about incidents connected with moral statements, as are the representations connected with political and ideological agendas.[6]

Vasari’s book is considered to function as a structure for the recycled narratives in concern. American art historian Nanette Salomon wrote in 1991that “[…] it in its incessant repetition produced and perpetuated the dominance of a particular gender, class and race as the purveyors of art and culture.”[7]

What interests me is to examine the artist within the art historical discourse. According to Salomon, in Vasari’s book we can identify the moment when the myth of the modern artist as a construction is born as well as the idea about what is worth knowing about a work of art, explained through the knowledge of a certain artist’s life. She has even noticed that it is possible to identify when Vasari invents or produces art critic or art history. Salomon writes:

    He does so by giving individual works particular validity through his assertion of value judgments bearing the weight of his authority.[8]

Highly evaluated works of art are treated as the product of the life of a genius. The artist that Vasari describes is mostly an upper-class male, an individual empowered by his social position. Salomon’s argument is, that thus has been constructed the art historical canon: women are omitted. uho Rissanen got a central place in the Finnish art scene of the early 20th century. During the first decades of the century he worked in Finland, mostly in Helsinki or in the north-eastern countryside, outside the Western European centers, but he also spent much time in Paris and elsewhere in France. In this article I consider the narrative about him as a representation connected with an ideological agenda.

In the history of art history Vasari’s structure has had a canonical status repeated and recycled for centuries. In the narratives artist’s work and life are linked together according to rhetoric and narrative models.[10] My research is framing national and nationalistic motives as well as the discursive form of evolutionary narratives that construct biographical stories of the art and life of artists. There is also a connection with the concept of the modern and the breakthrough of modern life in Finland. The interest is i.e. in the selection, in the mythology of great works and artists that were constructing the official art historical canon of the period in Finland. Catherine M. Soussloff has examined the cultural conditions pertaining to the artists in art history or literature; the approach is genealogical. The artist is central to the practice of an art history that has been driven by concerns and delineation of individual and period-related styles. These concerns entail the artist, art and art history with the art market.[11] The references are challenging; concentrating on the genre of artist biographies in art history writing, she recalls genealogy, the Lives of Saints -type biographies are the predecessors of the genre Lives of Artists.[12] Yet Vasari, as I mentioned above, had his predecessors also in Greek antiquity.

The empirical examples I chose for this article consist of two biographical narratives on the Rissanen. The study interprets the narratives in concern as the representations of the artist selected into the national canon of art history and the discursive form they structure and perform. My hypothesis is that the art historical discourse of Rissanen as a “Finnish” artist was constructed at the time of his breakthrough. Thus framing the narratives of the period, my study concentrates to interpret the representation of the artist and the values connected with it. However discursive the form of the narratives, there is always someone accentuating his authoritarian importance. Persons with huge cultural and social capital in the art field saw Rissanen as an interesting artist and painter. His paintings were only one of many causes for their interest.  Looking through the concept of social class, on the other hand, it was possible to distinguish that he was one of the rare artists whose background was in the lower social layers and whose native language was Finnish at a time when the majority of the artists were Swedish-speaking, upper class men. The issues of class and gender were important. Art historian J.J. Tikkanen wrote in a newspaper about Rissanen and his art: “He sees ordinary people with their own eyes, not through the glasses of the elite.”[13]

Thus the selected empirical material has functioned in the analysis to interpret the art scene of the period through the narratives.  The examples are art historical stories of the genre “art and life”, i.e. biographical narratives. One was published in a review in the cultural magazine Uusi Kuvalehti in 1900, edited by the author Juhani Aho and his brother, journalist Pekka Aho. Another one appeared in professor Onni Okkonen’s monograph on Rissanen, Juho Rissanen, Elämänkertaa ja taidetta (Juho Rissanen. Biography and Art) published in 1927. Okkonen was an art historian, art critic and at the time the professor of Art history at the University of Helsinki.

According to Catherine M. Soussloff the narrative force of the artist’s biography rests on two things: 1. anecdotes about what the artist has been purported to have done in his historical reality, issues of physical appearance, dress and interaction with other individuals, 2. the descripition of the works of art. The article “A Young Artist” is presumably written by Juhani Aho. It tells the story of a young Finnish-speaking artist whose art, by the cultural elite in Helsinki, was considered as simple and popularly “Finnish” as his north-eastern Finnish dialect. According to the narrative, Rissanen’s rough and straightforward images of ordinary people, representing the natives of his own origins in the north-eastern province of Savolax, were as “original” as they were humoristic, just like his odd habits.[15] The magazine came out and was read within the liberal section of the Finnish front, whose nationally important aims were to get Finland independent from Russia, and to emphasize that the country had its own, original Finnish language and culture. The article was published in the magazine just after Rissanen, at the age of 28, had had the possibility to show his early paintings in the Paris exhibition of 1900 where the Finnish pavilion was intended to be a strong national manifestation. In Paris, Rissanens’s paintings had been received well. Several newspapers in Finland quoted the French reviews, for instance, that by one of the authoritarian French art critics who exclaimed: “Mr Juho Rissanen, peasant, painter of the peasants, stay in Kuopio, in the world you  picture with so much seriousness and sensibility, never come here to learn the Parisian way.”[16]

My sources lead me to an interpretation that the representation of the young Rissanen, as a “Finnish artist” has been recycled in different frames, thus reconstructing a certain discursive form. I have found a huge amount of literary material where a number of critics, researchers and even authors retell this first narrative of the “young painter” in many variations, even several decades after it was published. There are reviews, articles and even fictive novels representing Rissanen on the one hand as a “typical Finnish” lower class native with funny manners and an odd way of speaking, an artist who had gained his position through the distinction and the dominant taste of the social and cultural field.[17] On the other hand, he was praised as a good and “suitable” artist, as “a national artist hero”. I know from my sources that also Rissanen himself told stories about his real life[18], though the narrative was sometimes based on literary models.

My point is that the performativity of the stories represents Rissanen as the “other”, a person with racial and ethnic origins in a remote countryside. His roots were seen to be in Nature – the innocent “paradise” where people are naïve and not too civilized.[19] In spite of the fact that he was trained both as an artist and a craftsman, he has often been described as “a self-taught nature born child”. Similar narratives have lived on until our days.[20] An analysis of the (historical) narratives performing the earlier histories reveals that the structure is nearly the same regardless of the situation, only the frame varies and there is the change of the significance. This being so, the representation is the issue that is to be framed. The second example is the narrative in Onni Okkonen’s above-mentioned monograph. Okkonen had got the idea to write a monograph on Rissanen as early as in 1918, during the Finnish Civil war after an interview with the artist. At the time, Rissanen who had lived abroad, mainly in France, for some years already, was about to leave Finland, again. The book was one of the first artist biographies written in Finland. My aim is to show that the purpose of the book was to prove that among all artists in the late 1920’s Finland, Juho Rissanen, now in his fifties and an successful artist, was still “the most original, powerful and national artistic genius of all”[in his time], to quote professor Okkonens conclusion.[21]

In fact, Okkonen had utilized a statement written in Swedish by the distinguished 19th century Finnish painter Albert Edelfelt as a recommendation for Rissanen’s travelling grant application in 1902. Okkonen does not reveal his source. Furthermore, he uses quotation marks although the translated sentence does not fully correspond with Edelfelt’s characterization: “[…] I consider Juho Rissanen to be one of the strongest, the most assiduous and the most original young talents amongst the younger artist generation”[22].

In the recommendation Edelfelt does not use the concept “national” although there is the idea of Rissanen as “the most original” (artist); according to the interpretation the artist was the most “native” of the young artists of his time. My argument about the biographical narratives as performative histories has an extension. Michel Foucault has claimed that having their biographies written has been a priviledge for the heroes, since some individuals have been submitted to others’ scrutiny. Today, however, it is possible to see the observation of people in the publicity as a method of control and subjection.[23] I ponder over whether both of these views can be distinguished in the biographical narratives of Juho Rissanen.

In accordance with the ideology of the 1920’s, it was important for Okkonen to talk about Rissanen as a peasant, ignoring the artist’s modest background. I have noticed that Okkonen did not care much about the comments and the clarifications Rissanen presented in the letter he sent to the author concerning the documented facts in the monograph manuscript. With the two empirical examples I have tried to give a brief account of one of the results of my study, namely the recycled “Juho Rissanen – a national artist hero” –narrative has been given various significations. In the 1920’s when the newly independent Finland was creating its cultural scene there were several art critics, art historians and other agents shouldering the role of authority. Many of them wanted to see art and artists in Finland as “Finnish”. The significance was, however, no longer exactly the same as around the turn of the century, when cultural and political domains in Finland were struggling for their own national culture.

Professor Okkonen’s monograph on Rissanen served the newly independent Finland; there was a strong need for national (art) histories and narratives. As I stated earlier, I see the nationalism of the period as a construction operating in connection with the process of modernization but also with the democratization of the new state.

In the early 20th century Juho Rissanen painted in the modernistic manner, but his domestic subjects and harsh mood were still defined “Finnish” in the spirit of the 19th century national authors. At the time Finland was mainly a poor agricultural country with a mainly agrarian population. It was a kind of “otherness” that was hard for the cultivated art professionals to define. Thus also some of the artists who pictured ordinary people were seen both as “Finnish” and as “exotic” phenomena.[25] Within the narrative of his monograph, Juho Rissanen was made a representation of the peasant, at the same time the most exotic and the most national artist.

The narrative of his biography is performing history also in another interesting way. It is possible to distinguish Vasari’s Renaissance-spirited evolution formula in the narrative: from nature to culture and from the self-taught nature-born child to the artistic genius.[26]  Although Rissanen had been given a place among the significant national (male) heroes of the art scene, in the narratives he was still regarded as a funny native apt to misadventure, to be the “other” [27]. The story of Juho Rissanen never got rid of the poor childhood or the representation of a bad luck hero.

This article discusses the art-historical research of 20th- century textile art. Taking the process of my doctoral research as a case in point, I consider the ways in which research materials and sources influence the conceptions of textile art that are constructed in art-historical writing.[1] My research investigated Finnish textile art in the 1920s and 1930s. The historical context was the modernizing art system of a newly independent country. Textile art emerged as a separate field, as part of the professionalization of art and design.[2]  Specialized training in textiles was launched in 1929 at the Central School of Arts and Crafts in Helsinki (est. 1871, now the Aalto University School of Arts, Design and Architecture) where tuition focused on traditional hand weaving.[3]

Textile media were quite highly valued during the inter-war years in Finnish cultural life where the idealization of agrarian culture was part of the prevailing conservative politics of the country. Textile art was presented in this context as a gendered field of design.[4]  Professionally educated textile artists, who were exclusively women in this period, displayed a public image of themselves as specialists in traditional hand weaving.[5]  Modern textile art was lauded in exhibitions and magazines and there are many published sources from the period. Regarding textile material, I based my research mostly on the collections of Design Museum Helsinki (until 2002 the Museum of Applied Arts). The museum was founded by the Finnish Society of Crafts and Design in 1873 as the teaching collection of the Central School of Arts and Crafts. In the 1920s the museum was provided with its own premises and it launched regular exhibitions, staging among other events, exhibitions by leading textile artists, which also resulted in collection acquisitions. However, most of the material that I used in my research came to the museum later, as donations from individual artists or institutions, and what is more important, some of the items were not textiles at all.

Objects are at the centre of a wide range of studies, whether the particular interest is in the process of designing and making, the makers and manufacturers, the product itself, or how it is sold, used and perceived. But object-based research is an undertaking based on both limitations and assumptions. The most evident limitation is the lack of statistical validity. The destruction caused by time, pests, climate (especially pertinent to textiles) and disasters means the rates of survival do not indicate original volumes of production; on the contrary, the rare, beautiful or costly object has the greater chance of survival. If such value contributes to survival, it also prompts the use of objects in forms of different from that originally intended: the utilitarian can become a work of art (as have Amish quilts) and the exclusive, utilitarian (as often happened to second-hand fine cloths). This flexibility is the less obvious limitation of object-based research, for it means that an object’s value itself may change over the course of its history.[6]

In the quotation above the British textile historian Mary Schoeser highlights a central question of object-based research of history: what is the evidential value of the more or less accidental remnants that we are studying. Compared with the challenges of textile historical research in general, often studying anonymous objects with limited contextual information, my task should be easier. In my research, the “makers” or designers of textiles are known and they have lived relatively close to the present day. Moreover, textile artists in general belong to a group of professionals whose history is quite well recorded. However, I will argue that also a scholar of 20th-century textile art can face the challenge of limited materials.

In this article I reflect on the methods of selecting and managing the material for an empirical study in my doctoral thesis, trying to analyse some of the problematic encounters. My article questions the role of individual (unique) pieces of textile art and ask what other materials preserved in the museum collection can offer to art-historical research. Through my own professional history at Design Museum I knew the textile collections from personal experience.[7] At the beginning of my research process, I did not really know what I was looking for. I surveyed the archives and textiles from the inter-war period – or those, which I thought would date from that time, as most of the material that I used was not dated. While inspired by a variety of promising material offering ginzburgian ”threads and traces”[8], I acknowledged that the material that I was studying started to change my thinking about the whole concept of textile art. The scarcity of sources on the material production of textiles was the biggest challenge for my research. Some private archives donated by designers to Design Museum were crucial for the development of my idea of entrepreneurship. While providing many kinds of material to study, and not enough to understand what “really” was produced and when, they opened for me the possibility to read the story from traces. Finnish textile art of the inter-war years has been appreciated for its high standard. The members of the new professional group were awarded international prizes and the colourful ryijys and modern tapestries of abstract pictorial quality and interesting texture are admired of their avant-garde aesthetic even today. One of the symbolic artworks of the period in the collections of Design Museum Helsinki is a wall-hanging by Maija Kansanen (1889–1957). (Fig. 1). The beautifully woven textile in distinct, Bauhausian style has been displayed in many exhibitions.[9] At least three unique decorative textiles like this “tapestry” (known in Finnish as kuvakudos) – to use the contemporary term – were bought for the museum collection directly from the artist who exhibited her works twice at the Museum of Applied Arts at the turn of the 1930s.[10]  However, they represent only one side of her oeuvre. In fact, Kansanen ran a weaving studio in Helsinki, which also produced fashionable hand-woven utility textiles and fabrics.[11] Although we are accustomed to think that artworks are “woven by” the artist, the weaver of this “tapestry” was probably not Maija Kansanen herself, and this raises further questions about the nature of this art.

In her unpublished seminar lecture from 1988, textile artist Kristiina Hänninen listed enterprises headed by professionally educated textile artists in Helsinki from 1900 to 1940. Hänninen based her survey on advertisements and articles in design magazines.[12]  Interested in the visibility of textile artists in the commercial context, I followed this route and found more traces of entrepreneurship, for example in the catalogues of the national fairs of trade and industry. Appearing alongside big companies and the textile industry, the names of contemporary textile artists represented their small textile studios. My interest in textile artists’ activities was fanned by my findings in the museum. A small collection of textile designs, fabric samples and photographs by textile artist Toini Kallio (1891–1981), came to the museum in 1979.[14] Having previously worked for the Friends of Finnish Handicraft, Toini Kallio founded in 1923 her own studio, Koristetaidetoimisto, in Helsinki. A calling card tells about the scope of services that the studio offered: “The Decorative Art Office of Toini Kallio produces ryijys, flat woven carpets, designs for textiles. Designs and craft kits upon commission.” (Fig. 2). I was fascinated, because in the published sources there was very little about this artist and now I learned that she had an office! Printed tags with the name of her studio were also attached to fabric samples, thus implying organized marketing.

Apart from samples there are no textiles in the archive of Toini Kallio. Sometimes, however, a sketch or a pattern drawing contains essential information about the missing object. In this case, detailed instructions for the weaver, written by the artist on the side of a pattern drawing informs about the exceptional technique used in this particular textile. (Fig. 3). In the pattern drawings there is also evidence of operating directly with customers. Pencil markings tell, for example, how much it costs for the customer to borrow a certain design for a ryijy: ”Rent 150 marks for a three-month loan”. However, in this archive there are no other documents of the weaving studio. Even the basic information had to be gathered from other sources. Apart from a list of Kallio’s most important commissions, written presumably by the artist herself, all basic information on activities, production and the people involved are missing. A similar case is the archive of decorative artist Katri Warén-Waris (1891–1973, née Cannelin, also Warén), who had a private weaving studio and interior design firm in Turku.[15] Also in this archive, donated by the family, the ”design material”, pattern drawings, sketches and tags provide evidence of networks and activity. There is, however, no other information about the production. The archives of textile artists who are known to have had studios during the inter-war years do not generally contain information on economic matters. There are no ledgers, receipt books or price lists and even material on the products is sporadic and rare from this period. Without this kind of evidence how can one prove that a weaving studio or “decorative art office” even functioned? Luckily there was an exception. The workbooks of Dora Jung’s (1906–1980) weaving studio, active in Helsinki from 1932 until the death of the artist, give concrete information about the activities: the products, weavers and even the clientele. On the basis of this material, I could count the amount of textiles produced annually. For example during 1939 (the year when systematic documentation was started) the weaving studio produced over 100 metres of curtain fabrics and there were several private orders for woven tablecloths and napkins. There is a card for each project of the studio, often with a textile sample. Thus, I could also see what kinds of textiles were sent to the New York World’s Fair in the same year. (Fig. 4). The Design Museum received the large Dora Jung collection in early 1980s, immediately after the death of the artist, and further material was donated in 2008 by relatives. The extensive archive has been used in several exhibitions.[16] It contains a lot of material on individual commissions of ecclesiastical textiles and unique, one-off art pieces, which is also the work for which Dora Jung has been known until the present. However, detailed documents about the serial production of utility textiles in this archive open up a completely new perspective on the artist. They also demonstrate the capacity of a weaving studio basing on hand weaving. In the Finnish art and design scene of the inter-war period there were some twenty ‘weaveries’, ‘design offices’, ‘studios’ or similar enterprises run by artists such as Maija Kansanen, Toini Kallio and Dora Jung. Only a few of these studios were formally registered and many did not last very long. Entrepreneurship was not a contemporary notion but one that is widely used today to describe organizing and marketing production in the private sector. However, I argued that the work of women designers who organized the production of their own designs could be compared to women’s traditional entrepreneurship. Often based at home, and eschewing public records, the business of women selling food, clothes and care, tends to remain invisible in economic surveys despite the undisputed significance and considerable scale of this type of manufacture and commerce, as noted by the Finnish historian Kirsi Vainio-Korhonen.[18]

As economic actors, textile artists created new meanings for crafted textiles in the context of applied art and design. Eva Anttila (1894–1993), a central figure in Finnish textile art,[19]  who also had for a while a private weaving studio, described her professional field as essentially connected to utilitarian aims and commercial practices. She stated that knowledge of colours, materials and a sense of style are the methods of the modern textile artist. Anttila wrote in 1933: ”Only a few years ago the prevailing idea was that applied art products are only for the wealthy, who in their glamorous homes have a suitably dignifying place for an artistic tankard or a painstakingly made wall-hanging. Today a modest young couple visits an applied arts workshop and equips their whole standard home of two rooms and a kitchen inexpensively and practically.”[20]

Eva Anttila’s testimony was essential when I formulated my argument about entrepreneurship in Finnish inter-war textile art. Her statement substantiates the fact that running a business was not regarded as antithetic to the identity of an artist. However, the artist-based archives in museums are more ambivalent sources because of the selection processes that precede the formation of a collection. Besides institutional control practised by the museum, also the value systems of the profession have a great impact on available sources. The crucial question is what kind of material is considered worth preserving by the donator. In the case of the painter Ester Helenius, who donated her sales records as part of her legacy to the Art Museum of Hämeenlinna, the Finnish art historian Tutta Palin has interpreted this as an indication of her pride in making a living from her art, as an independent woman.[21] It seems, though, that including documents of business activities – of selling one’s art – in the personal “museum collection” has been a sensitive issue for other artists.

According to my colleague, Ebba Brännback, who worked as the curator of collections at Design Museum Helsinki during the past three decades, material on concrete production and economic matters has seldom been offered to the museum. Finances and money have been considered a delicate issue; for example information about wages is commonly understood as confidential and subject to disposal.[22] This parallels my own experiences of interviewing textile artists. Sometimes they provide a very clear idea about what the textile artist considers relevant in his or her career and, respectively worth preserving. I have been told several times that the textile artist has thrown away everything that has to do with finances as it was considered unimportant and perhaps a bit risky, too. One textile artist who later worked solely with art objects wanted me to dismiss the part of her career that she in hindsight considered “commercial”. The commercial products of her weaving studio included, for example, woollen blankets and men’s ties, very popular items that were sold in a Helsinki department store and even exported. This was in the 1960s and her work was actually part of a much wider phenomenon. How should a researcher relate to this self-censorship that will erase a part of the history of textile art? In Design Museum Helsinki there is a large archive of textile designs of the Friends of Finnish Handicraft (Suomen Käsityön Ystävät, hereinafter also FFH). This Helsinki-based association was founded in 1879 to promote Finnish style and domestic crafts production. The association began to organize design competitions in the 1890s and from the turn of the century it worked extensively with Finnish artists, architects and designers to generate contemporary textile designs for Finnish homes. Still promoting itself first and foremost as ‘art organization’ the association was reorganized as a limited company in 1920.[23] The archive of original sketches consists of almost 7000 textile designs dating from a period of 100 years. Most of the designs have been obtained through public design competitions and thus, represent the jury-selected elite works of their time.[24] The hand of the artist is visible in individual sketches and examples from this archive have also been used in exhibitions to illuminate the style of a period. The well-preserved collection of authentic sketches by a number of Finnish artists was also the first archive that was digitized at the Design Museum in the early 1990s. I will return to the sketch archive later in this article.

The historical collection of the FFH was donated to different institutions with the support of the Finnish Ministry of Education and the acquisition was part of an operation to rescue the company, which was in economic difficulties. Thus it also reflects the values of the company and Finnish cultural policies of the period. The entire archive donation was organized by interior designer Lisa Johansson-Pape (1907–1989), long-term artistic director and former employee of the company. When organizing this big collection in the mid-1980s, Johansson-Pape capitalized on her thorough personal knowledge of the company. A collection of fabric samples came to Design Museum at the same time as the sketches. Compared with the sketch collection the samples were not systematically organized, many of them lack information about designer and date. Identified by Lisa Johansson-Pape there are files of samples designed by textile artists who headed the weaving studio and worked as in-house artists: for example Laila Karttunen (1895–1981), Lotta Ring (1915–1965) and later, Lea Eskola (1923–2012). In one of the boxes containing samples by Laila Karttunen there is the curtain fabric called Virta (Stream). According to a tag attached to the fabric, it was designed for a café or a salon. (Fig. 5). Some of the samples have detailed information, for example designer and product names, materials and descriptions of construction – but more rarely the date, though. However, most of the older samples, distinguished also by their quality and design, are without any information. In rare cases there is written information on a tag attached to the textile. Sometimes a price is indicated or the width of fabric. In fact, these random tags, which I dated to the 1920s and 1930s, aroused my interest in the crafted serial production of interior fabrics. Though not attributed or dated, the samples gave evidence of organized product development in this field.

Further information, however, had to be sought in documents kept in the National Archives of Finland. My research revealed that during the 1920s and 1930s the FFH systematically developed a line of woven interior fabrics.[26]  Already in the annual exhibition of 1919 it presented a line of furniture fabrics designed by the contemporary head of the weaving studio, crafts teacher Valborg Madsén-Himanen (1888–1965). Ten years later the company’s weaving studio was headed for the first time by a trained textile artist, Laila Karttunen, who was especially recruited to renew the line of woven textiles. In the 1930s, production methods were rationalized using standard widths of fabrics and individual product names. The array of products was astonishingly wide: according to the 1938 inventory – one of the very few listings of production that is preserved – the company offered at least 75 types of furnishing fabrics and approximately 70 types of curtain fabrics, with some of the patterns woven in different colourings. There were larger commissions for interior fabrics for contemporary building projects, one of the most noteworthy of these being the new Parliament House, inaugurated in 1931.[27] The FFH had a shop in Helsinki and, based on shop inventories and photographs, I have suggested that fabrics were sold there directly to customers. Information on eventual private customers is, however, sporadic. There is so far little research on the clients of the Friends of Finnish Handicraft, but it can be suggested that the modern hand-woven fabrics were used in the new middle class urban homes of Helsinki, whereas most of the ryijy craft kits were sold to homes in the countryside. My research pointed to a line of products of the FFH in the inter-war years, which has been overlooked in later accounts of the company. The research and interpretation of hand-woven fabric samples in the museum collection require specialized knowledge. Samples are also problematic as exhibition objects, which affects their use and visibility in historical narratives. Attribution – designer and date – is a key question, and most of the samples lack it. As mentioned earlier, Lisa Johansson-Pape has identified some of them, but these attributions raise further questions. Firstly, we do not know on what basis she did her attributions. Secondly, she left a great deal of samples without “labels” (at least the work of Valborg Madsén-Himanen) but, interestingly, identified those designed by professionally educated textile artists. This demonstrates the focus on professional designers, which in a way unites the history and contemporary practice of the FFH and the museum. The artist-centred agenda of the FFH greatly expanded during the inter-war years with the success of craft kits and the high status of textile art in Finnish cultural life. The artistic leadership of the company, demonstrated, for example, by design competitions with juries, implemented the power of the national designer organization, the Association of Decorative Artists Ornamo (present-day Finnish Association of Designers Ornamo), founded in 1911, and consisting of professionally educated designers.[28]  Obviously, the community of Finnish designers was also a critical network for the national design museum. At Design Museum, the profession has been one of the key criteria in collecting, the designer’s membership in national designer organizations or a recognized status in the field.[29]

The identifiability of samples is also connected to the hierarchies of production in the FFH. While new designs for ryijys and other “piece-like” textiles – carpets, curtains, wall-hangings – were acquired from competitions and, thus, are visible in the sketch archive, fabrics by the yard were designed by in-house designers.[30] There is, however, an interesting exception to the rule. In the 1930s, two design competitions of hand-woven fabrics by the yard were organized, where instead of sketches, entries were requested as samples. The preserved entries (samples), which were anomalies in the competition practice, were found among the other fabric samples in the FFH archive. The first prize was given to the design Pallo (Ball) by textile artist Hulda Potila (1894–1968) who was the head teacher of textile art of the Central School of Arts and Crafts in Helsinki and a sound expert in weaving (fig. 6).[31]  This new idea of evaluating textiles as samples and not as designs illustrates the value that was placed on the contemporary design of fabrics. However, as these two competitions remained the only ones using samples, the tradition of designing on paper was not interrupted. Fabrics by the yard were designed by in-house designers also in the future and thus remained a specialized field of design. There are samples of hand-woven fabrics in several archives of textile artists in the Design Museum. In the archive of Katri Warén-Waris there are also some fascinating sketches for fabrics. One of them is the chequered pattern sketched with watercolour and gouache on tissue paper, which is possibly for a curtain or furnishing fabric. (Fig. 7). While the FFH archive contains no sketches for fabric designs from this period, here we have proof that ”non-figurative” designs and even repeat patterns for simple weaves like this were designed on paper.

Having seen many samples of hand-woven fabrics from the inter-war period, I had thought that they had been designed ”hands-on”, using the methods learned in weaving tuition, based on the theory of weaving structure and practical experiments with yarn at the loom. Also, a sketch for a woven fabric goes against the idea of instrument-specific design, designing “hands-on” that marked a break from the tradition of pattern drawing. This idea has been perhaps most powerfully mediated through the publicity of weaving studio of Bauhaus.[32] Handicraft as a laboratory for industrial production became a modernist idiom, and the traditional hand-loom became a medium of “sketching for the machine”.[33]  However, educated already in the 1910s, Katri Warén-Waris did not have training in textile techniques. Her tuition had aimed at skills in pattern drawing and the sketch can be understood against that background. In her weaving studio, she had experts in hand weaving to help with the practical work.[34] In that context the sketch can also be read as a means of communication between the artist and the weaver. In Finnish art history, textile art has been studied through conventions of the discipline, focusing on pictoriality and selecting as research subjects textiles that reflect the visual arts.[35] However, a piece of textile art is not easily comparable to a unique art object. To illustrate problems of classification I will take ryijy textiles as an example. The ryijy (Sw. rya, also known as ryijy-rug) is mostly a knotted and piled textile woven from woollen yarn. The history of this type of textile is long and extensive, but at the beginning of the 20th century it was considered typically Finnish and a modern decorative textile was created from it, based on local history. The “renaissance” of the ryijy was part of the nation building process of the newly independent country. The publication of The Ryijy-rugs of Finland by the ethnologist U. T. Sirelius in 1924 launched a boom of collecting and reproducing old ryijy textiles.[36] Specialized textile artists embraced the “ryijy craze”, developing nuances of expression and creating new functions for the technique. At the same time, they renewed another old tradition, that of tapestries, taking also there distance from naturalism and orthodox craftsmanship.[37]

In the 1930s new ryijys, abstract in design, and reformist also technically, were exhibited in Finland and abroad. Given international publicity in the politically sensitive years before and during the Second World War, these Finnish textiles regenerated a nationalist discourse where individuality of expression and the artist’s personal touch were underlined.[38]  This discourse of the ryijy as an art form, expressing material-romanticism, was highly influential for the development of this genre into one of signature products of Finnish Design during the post-war years. Although individual and original, the ryijy designs of the 1930s were, however, meant for serial production. In fact, the idea of unique or art ryijys (Finnish: taideryijy) often associated with this period is of later construction. The Friends of Finnish Handicraft was a key actor promoting modern ryijys designed by artists. There are over 1300 ryijy designs in this collection. The FFH began to organize ryijy design competitions since 1904 and in the 1930s there were several competitions annually to meet the growing demand for patterns. One of the designs is called Luonnos (Sketch) by Eva Brummer, awarded in competition in 1932. (Fig. 8). The Luonnos ryijy was marketed for the readers of the popular Kotiliesi magazine in 1934 as a craft kit, a do-it-yourself ryijy for the Finnish home. (Fig. 9). The sales of craft kits were crucial for the economic growth of the FFH in the interwar period. The cultural historian Minna Koljonen has shown that craft kits for ryijy textiles were delivered throughout the country by mail order.[40] A new technique of sewing ryijys on a fabric was launched to overcome the challenge of using large hand-looms in urban apartments. When marketing these craft kits to Finnish consumers, the artistic value and individuality of the ryijy designs were underlined, and the name of the designer was always mentioned. So, at the same time when Luonnos by Eva Brummer was serially reproduced in the context of domestic craft, the “unique” artistic qualities of the ryijy were commoditized through marketing and exhibition critique. Although we do not have the sales figures of this particular craft kit, there must have been several examples of the Luonnos ryijy in Finnish homes.[41]  In the collections of Design Museum Helsinki there is also one “copy”. (Fig. 10). It is not documented when this ryijy was woven, but the Luonnos at Design Museum significantly resembles the version that was published in an advertisement in 1934.[42]  However, when presenting this ryijy in exhibitions it is most often dated “1932” following the year of the sketch. In fact, the standard way to present ryijys, whether 20th-century designs by artists or reproductions of old folk ryijys, is with reference to the date of design or, in the case of the folk ryijys, the date woven in the textile.[43]  This is, of course, correct, considering the creation of the design but a major mistake when dating the textile. The technique – which in itself is quite simple – has been reinterpreted according to later conceptions of the “original” technique and to changing ideals of the domestic environment, where these textiles were used. Also the materials have changed considerably from the wide variety of yarn types in the pile of 1930s ryijys. Standardization has been necessary in the serial production of craft kits, taking into consideration for example the quality and availability of yarn. Thus, there exist many kinds of objects based on a singular design idea: sketch(es), pattern drawings, and, finally, textiles. On the rare occasions when all the categories are available, the design process can be illustrated with these objects. However, the historical accuracy of this narrative should be questioned, as there were, in fact, several kinds of processes for reproducing ryijys from the original idea. The full process from sketch to textile took place at the FFH weaving studio where the first copies of new ryijys were woven by specialized craftspersons. The sketch by the artist (designer) was accepted for production by artist experts in a jury and by the board of the company. Then a pattern drawing based on the sketch was developed by the company’s trained draughtspersons, many of them textile artists by training. After the selection of yarns, the ryijy was the woven by a weaver.[44]  The process aimed at the careful reproduction of the sketch. In the case of competition entries, the artist was later even expected to supervise the making of the piece. In practice, this included participation in the selection of yarns and following the progress of the weaving.[45]

From the 1950s onwards, close collaboration between the artist and the specialized ryijy weaver was publicly commended, and it became a trademark of the FFH. In some cases, a numbered series of limited copies was produced, implying the practice of reproducing art objects. The first copies were sometimes labelled with a tag on which both names were written and today these pieces are sought-after collectibles.[46] These “original” copies were often displayed in contemporary exhibitions and photographed, thus producing documentary material for historical research. Ryijys were, of course, also woven and sewn by amateurs with differing skills for their own homes, using for example the DIY-kits of the FFH. There were also so called “market ryijys”, illegal commercial reproductions of popular FFH designs that were produced semi-professionally in the countryside. The FFH had its own special materials and methods, which changed over the years but are nonetheless distinguishable and I think that it is possible to identify a ryijy woven by a professional weaver.

The production of contemporary textiles for Finnish homes was for a long while a key concept for the FFH. However, since the end of the 1970s the company has turned more and more to reproducing historical designs, one of the first being the Liekki (Flame) ryijy by the painter Akseli Gallen-Kallela dating from 1899. The number of historical designs in their catalogues has even grown over the past two decades.[47] Obviously, the continuous reproduction of designs over several decades challenges the researcher who has to indicate the place of an individual textile in this complexity. In the case of the ryijy, the authenticity of individual historical textiles is often considered secondary compared to “authentic” design. Commodification affected also the arts and craft practices and the “serial production” of ryijy art as craft kits can be studied in the context of changing meanings of art in the age of mass production.[48] We do not know, however, what the role of the artist/designer was for the contemporary consumer. The date of origin and the name of the designer, so important in a design museum context, are secondary information to people who owned a ryijy, as the survey of The Craft Museum of Finland shows. In the call for papers for the TAHITI4 conference the organizers asked whether material as such contains ‘truths’, or does our understanding of materials depend on our approaches and methods? I have described in this article how I reconstructed the work of modern textile artists based on information gathered from a variety of available sources. During the research process, I used information that I had absorbed when working in direct contact with the material. Samples of hand-woven fabrics were in this sense the most inspiring material. Textiles that so far had been without dating or attribution started to become meaningful.

I have argued here that the selection of sources and material guides our conception of textile art. Limiting the investigation to art objects in museum collections gives a different result than when searching for traces of entrepreneurship. Representing textile art of the inter-war period with wall-hangings such as those by Maija Kansanen (fig. 1) underlines the decorative (“artistic”) aspect of feminine craft. Moreover, exercised in the museum context the canon of the unique piece of art obscures the work of these women designers as heads of their own studios.

My art-historical research project is based on personal experience of a museum collection. I used material that was uncharacteristic of previous studies in textile art and access to all kinds of materials in the Design Museum collections was highly important for me. The heterogeneous and more or less sporadic archives of artists and designers were central for my study, containing new kinds of material and also representing the values and ideas of the artist. My most fruitful sources, ledgers and other economic documents and workbooks, however, are of questionable status in the art-museum system so far and I think that my work points to a gap in museum sources. Material of production and economic affairs were not previously thought relevant to be collected and made available as a resource for researchers either by the museum or the textile artists. Fortunately, the situation is changing and contextual historical information is considered more and more important also in this field. Finnish Industrial Design Archive in Mikkeli, the national institution devoted to documenting the history of design enterprises will hopefully in the future also contain material about textile artists’ businesses.

As a researcher my questions and motivation grew from contemporary challenges in museum work, acknowledging the importance of historiographical reflection and constant re-evaluation of the methods of writing history. Design objects have not lost their significance but quite the contrary. The aura of the object has not vanished and today, there is a whole array of symbolic key objects that the audience wants to see in an exhibition of Finnish design. It is mostly the visually interesting, undamaged and clean objects that tell the story also in museum exhibitions, not the samples and sketches.

Unlike many design historians and textile historians, I focused on the profession of educated textile artists. In the 21st century this outline may seem outdated as the work of educated designers provides a very narrow selection of material culture and as the line between professionals and those who are not is debatable. However, ”designer textiles” of the early 20th century make fascinating objects for art-historical research while crossing borders. They are produced both physically and discursively in the borderlines of tradition and the modern, handicraft and machine technology, high culture and popular culture. Even regarding the work of recognized artists and designers, it is still relevant to study the techniques and materials of their works. Also the questions of attribution and authorship (makership) are valid here – the processes of the collective that produces modern textile art.

Design history as an independent academic discipline has been with us for more than forty years and is now represented by an ever-increasing number of different voices and approaches, a growth in the number and geographical spread of national and international societies of design and design history, dedicated journals, documentaries, television programmes, promotional and professional organizations, museums, galleries and local, regional, national and international exhibitions from cabinet to large-scale. In the wake of pioneering doctorates and first freestanding specialist undergraduate degrees developed in Britain from the mid-1970s onwards, design history has also acknowledged the significance of the consumer and embraced opportunities offered by a range of other disciplines ranging from social anthropology, ethnography and material culture studies through to economic, political and business history. It has also moved away decisively from a ‘heroes and heroines of design’ approach that co-existed with a commitment to educating businesses, consumers and designers through what was for several decades posited as ‘good design’.[1]

Over the past decade major publishing houses such as Bloomsbury (incorporating the many design-facing titles by Berg) have commissioned an ever-expanding range of design reference books, textbooks, monographs and journals. As well as decimating acres of forestation and populating library shelves with kilometres of reference texts, many of these will doubtless play their part subsequently as individual units in the publishers’ wars for digital dominance in design history, design and other related disciplines. Such an outlook also raises a number of concerns about the ways in which disciplinary Readers, Encyclopaedias and Handbooks may condition the ways in which those experiencing the discipline for the first time approach the subject. At their most inventive such volumes offer fresh perspectives for those more attuned to the wider possibilities afforded by multi-, inter- and trans-disciplinary approaches. Alas, these are comparatively few in number with Readers in particular tending to follow conservative and well-trodden ground. Perhaps worthy of more positive note in this second decade of the 21st century is that the digital humanities – in which digital tools and software increasingly enhance and enrich approaches to art and design history, history and other humanities disciplines – have become an increasingly significant part of the contemporary research, methodological and dissemination landscape.

However, the approach of recent publishers (and, by inference, authors) of design history ‘Readers’ remains firmly rooted in approaches characteristic in the analogue age, quasi-religious relics of past patterns of learning and teaching, even if technically available online. In general they have failed to produce effective and imaginative digital learning packages attuned to the needs and expectations of 21st century students. There are few genuine contemporary technically enhanced equivalents to those launched in Britain to underpin studies in the history of architecture and design in the mid-1970s at the Open University[2]. Its learning packages were supported by ‘Readers’ such as Form Follows Function: A Source Book for the History of Architecture and Design 1890–1939 (1975) and related course books, accompanied by coordinated and directed use of contemporary media units of study – television and radio broadcasts incorporating documentary film, audio-visual interviews with architects and designers, as well as filmed ‘on-site’ visits to buildings and urban environments and living architects, designers and writers. In this author’s view their digital equivalents today have yet to be fully engaged with in a structured way.

Other trends that have been emerging in the 1990s and 2000s include increasing considerations of globalisation and the cartography of design, historically and contemporary. The dominance of Anglophone and first industrial world cartographies of design activity has been increasingly challenged by the post Eastern bloc resurgence of national identities, economies and patterns of consumption in the later 1980s together with the restructuring of Europe in the early Millennial years which in 2014 now comprises 28 countries. Furthermore, since 1999 there have been several organisations that have grown in scope and global involvement. Perhaps most significant amongst these has been the International Conference for Design History and Design Studies (ICDHS) that provided a platform that originated in the Design History Seen from Abroad: History and Histories of Design conference held at the University of Barcelona in 1999. It sought to co-ordinate an alternative map of design history from the perspective of the globally significant perspectives of the Spanish-speaking world. This embraced many countries in South America as well as tens of millions of native speakers in the United States. It has stimulated a further 9 conferences around the world with that of 2016 planned for Taipei.  The notion that there were many voices speaking to histories of design often overlooked by major publishers with international readerships was made clear in the Mind the Map: Design History beyond Borders ICDHS held in Istanbul in 2002 where researchers represented activities and approaches in a wide variety of other countries and languages. By the time of the 9th conference in 2014 at the University of Aveiro in Portugal on the theme of Tradition, Transition, Trajectories: Major or Minor Influences? more than 40 nations were represented.

Other approaches that have gathered pace over the past twenty years relate to the ways in which a significantly greater number of design history researchers have become involved in the organisation of national and international conferences and symposia and the production of keynote papers, articles and reports that address the economic, social and political significance of design, whether in relation to such considerations as national prosperity, ageing and well-being, or sustainability and community issues. It is also noteworthy, especially in Britain but no doubt elsewhere (as in the United States), how often many officially commissioned reports reveal a relative ignorance of previous documents, debates and policy papers, even if published within the previous decade. Historians have a role to play in exposing such circular thinking. Born 60 years ago Pekka Korvenmaa’s experience of architecture, design and design history has evolved during the period of change briefly delineated above. His 20s coincided with the first generation of debates about the relative importance of design history as an adjunct to, or part of, design education or even as a complementary yet freestanding emergent discipline with a potentially wider agenda. A very high percentage of primary resources relating to design practice, policy, industry, education, promotion and consumption in Finland are inevitably in the Finnish language. Furthermore, the latter is spoken only by about 5 million native speakers and does not have a significant currency worldwide; nor is it one that is likely to attract many researchers beyond Scandinavia into a place where it is possible to enter a specialist niche of understanding. Such considerations present an even more severe problem for many other countries around the world including those that constituted the former Yugoslavian republic where design history is not widely practiced, supported or disseminated. It is all the more important that there are design and design history researchers, thinkers and writers from constrained linguistic bases who are able to communicate to wider audiences – in Finland, Korvenmaa is clearly one of the more significant voices, although the country has embraced design projection abroad for sound economic reasons over many decades. The importance of his overall contribution of Finnish design may be seen in his Finnish Design – a Concise History published in 8 editions between 2009 and 2014, which was favourably reviewed in the Journal of Design History in 2011 where Korvenmaa’s ability to transcend those shortcomings usually associated with design heroes was considered by the reviewer to

    – – successfully contextualize the heroic age of modern design.  Though design heroes such as Alvar Aalto, Tapio Wirkkala and Kaj Franck are widely known, the national history and design culture out of which they emerged and in which they worked are not.[4]

Other useful books by Korvenmaa that take readers beyond the notion that ‘design heroes’ is not necessarily a dirty epithet or one not politely mentioned in design history circles include his Innovation Versus Tradition: The Architect Lars Sonck: Works and Projects, 1900–1910 (1991)[5], his co-authored Alvar Aalto: Between Humanism and Materialism (1998)[6], or his Ilmari Tapiovaara (1997)[7], published in 4 languages and 10 editions. The latter perhaps provided some of the impetus for the 2014 Tapiovaara centenary exhibition at the Design Museum Helsinki[8] and accompanying book Ilmari Tapiovaara – Life and Design[9] to which Korvenmaa contributed an essay.

Pekka Korvenmaa has been visibly engaged with the dissemination of research, invited keynotes, consultancy, and presentations of design history, theory and practice in Europe, Japan, South America since the 1980s and is a familiar figure on the international stage. He has also been involved with a number of international design history organizations including the ICDHS for which he serves as a Board Member. Korvenmaa was co-chair (representing the University of Art and Design Helsinki, now a part of the Aalto University Helsinki) with Krista Kodres (representing the Estonian Academy of Art, Tallinn) for the fifth ICDHS conference in 2006 entitled Connecting: a conference on the multivocality of design history & design studies. By incorporating the Nordic Forum of Design History’s (Nordiskt Forum för Formgivningshistoria) biannual symposium into the conference program this ensured an event of significance that helped to draw wider audiences to innovative design and design historical research in a highly important geographic region for design production, practice and consumption. Korvenmaa contributed a keynote address on ‘We got history – anybody interested? Finland, innovation policies and the role of the past’.[10] His commitment to the exploration and promotion of such concerns could be discerned in his 1998 publication of ‘The condition and future challenges of Finnish design: a survey launched by SITRA’[11]. His belief that design research was one of the keys to understanding Finland’s strong design position,[12] was a standpoint further explored in articles such as ‘Rhetoric and Action: Design Policies in Finland at the Beginning of the third Millennium’[13]. His promotion of research into innovation policies has surfaced in many other international locations and has been a significant and developing theme of his work as seen, for example, in his contribution to two of a series of Erasmus seminars in 2007 at the Middle Eastern Technical University in Ankara, Turkey. These were entitled ‘Craft, Design and the Construction of the Welfare State’ and ‘Finland, Design and National Policies of Innovation’. Nonetheless, as a design historian he has also examined key issues in earlier periods[14] as part of his ongoing research into Finnish design.

The Aalto University in Helsinki – the result of the merger of the former University of Technology, the Helsinki School of Economics and the University of Art and Design Helsinki in which Professor Korvenmaa has held significant and influential roles – is providing him with the opportunity to launch himself from a new research springboard via the award of a sabbatical that also coincides with his attaining the age at 60, the new 50 for historians of design in Finland.
As a still relatively new person to Finnish academia, it has been interesting, and sadly familiar, recently to see discussions in the press about the economic relevance of graduates from the arts and humanities. In the Helsingin Sanomat on 5th June, Juhani Korhonen suggested (translated by a friend from the original Finnish), that “it is necessary to ask whether for example ethnology, archaeology and theater are fields whose workers we need to survive the recession”. We could guess that he may well have been thinking of the related subjects of art history and museology, too. Of course, all those involved in these subject areas would immediately disagree with Korhonen. It was heartening to see, for example, swift responses from Sanna Tirkkunen (7th June), and jointly from University of Helsinki ethnologists Professors Hanna Snellman, and Katriina Siivonen and University Lecturer Pia Olsson (8th June). The responses highlighted the importance of all disciplines for a happy society, pointing not only to the transferable skills gained from studying the arts and humanities, but also the added meaning and fulfilment to be found from attending such venues as museums and concert halls.

It is true that the arts and humanities do equip students in many ways for their future career paths. That is to say, although not all graduates of these subjects will go on to work within roles which have a direct and obvious relationship to their original disciplines, there is still a very important place in the wider workforce for graduates with such perspectives and training. Understanding where we come from, as well as where we are going, and the ways in which humanity has chosen to express itself through art and other creative means, is arguably essential to understanding the context of all that we do now. It helps us realise that nothing is ever truly “objective”, and that even the so-called “hard” sciences are socially and culturally constructed – from the questions asked of them to the ways in which they are interpreted and explained.

I mentioned in my opening paragraph that this is also sadly familiar, as for many years in my native UK questions have frequently been asked of the “value” of certain subjects. My own parent discipline of archaeology has suffered greatly, with whole university departments closed in some cases, and the tragic loss of so many continuing education opportunities and the enrichment that they offered (see Lee 2008). It feels like a well-walked path to have to go through the list of diverse skills developed (and hence the versatility of our graduates), not to mention the increasing evidence from research both here in Finland (e.g. Liikanen 2010) and elsewhere (e.g. Chatterjee and Noble 2013) that engagement with art and culture in its many forms actively contributes to wellbeing. Put simply, art, history and culture make us feel better. This has a knock-on effect, of course, for a nation’s economy. A happier, healthier society needs less medical support and less time off work. Leisure time engaging in cultural and heritage-related activities is time well spent, and we will always need individuals who are able to interpret and safeguard these precious resources for current and future generations. Other studies (e.g. Lumley 2005) have shown the knock-on effect of tourist visits to art museums, cultural heritage sites and other “visitor attractions” to the wider economy: a family having a day out to visit a museum will likely also buy from local shops, take lunch in the museum café or somewhere else nearby (in turn creating more demand for local produce), and if they are staying for a couple of days, the local hotels and “night economy” (of restaurants, pubs, theatres and so on) may also benefit.

But of course, it isn’t, and shouldn’t be, just about economic “value”. In fact, if we think about learning, expertise, or indeed anything, in terms simply of monetary value (or more accurately – “cost”), then we miss the point of what “value” actually is. The journal that I edit has an associated blog, which welcomes discussions, announcements and other content. In a very recent blog post, John Carman (2015) Senior Lecturer in Heritage Valuation at the University of Birmingham’s Ironbridge International Institute for Cultural Heritage asks very similar questions, albeit in the context of the ongoing debate over Open Access publishing. Carman states that “value and cost are not the same thing and do not relate directly or simply.” And it is important to remember this, especially in times of economic uncertainty; times when the temptation is to cut away that which cannot easily be restored. We need graduates of the arts and humanities just as surely as we need strong natural scientists, medical researchers, business developers and economists. They are part of our whole, and we would be far worse off without them.

 In my dissertation “Laboratory for a New Architecture: The Airport Terminal, Eero Saarinen and the Historiography of Modern Architecture,” I discuss the airport terminal in relation to the history of architectural modernism. Saarinen’s Trans World Airlines Terminal, built between 1956 and 1962 at the John F. Kennedy Airport in New York, and Dulles International Airport, which serves Washington D.C. and was completed in 1963, were the first airport terminals to enter the annals of modern architecture. Yet, curiously, Saarinen’s Athens International Airport, built between 1958 and 1969, was not mentioned in the canon of influential modernist buildings. The research question I address in my dissertation is, why the airport terminal was not included in the histories, when it, as a typical 20thcentury building type, developed simultaneously with the institutionalization of modern architecture? I hypothesize that the airport was overlooked because it was seen as infrastructure, and not architecture. Furthermore, its transient modernity did not coincide with the aims of historians, who could not utilize an emergent building type to demonstrate how modernism revolutionized architectural vocabularies. Discussing the related histories of aviation and technologies, the imaginaries of aviation, the typological instability of the airport terminal, and Saarinen’s architectural practice, I utilize genealogy, microhistory, and Science and Technology Studies to intervene in the historiography of modern architecture. Specifically, I question the assumption that architecture follows technological developments, the narrow interpretation of modernity dominating the writing of architectural history, and the resulting myopia in the classification of emerging building types.

Examining the airport terminal in relation to modernity and technology, I claim that science, technology, and architecture are similar cultural constructions within larger cultural patterns and confront the techno-deterministic idea of their parallel development trajectories. The seminal histories of modernism nurtured an idea of architecture being the true expression of modern engineering, and a new scientific worldview. Historians’ view of modernity emphasized continuous and harmonious progress instead of transience, crisis and disintegration, which were other aspects of the processes of modernization. In addition, their view of technology was uncomplicatedly positive. Despite the airport terminal being related to the progressive technology of the airplane, it became a curious blind spot in most accounts of architectural modernism. Therefore, the history of the airport terminal is only discovered in other types of documentation, such as the histories of technology and aviation, cultural histories addressing the imaginaries of aviation, and design manuals for the emerging building type. Especially early modernists like le Corbusier, were fascinated with aviation and wrote vividly of their impressions and experience onboard the early aircraft. Based on this documentation, I narrate the story of the airport terminal, exposing its typological instability and alternative development patterns. The timeframe of my study extends from 1909, when the pioneering aerodromes were built for the first flying events, to 1969, which is the completion date of my third case study, the Athens Airport, and the year when jumbo-jets entered commercial service and the supersonic Concorde flew for the first time. The airport terminal developed from the architecture of the early aerodromes, and airfields of the twenties, to a recognizable building type in the thirties. Airports were frequently rebuilt to meet the changing demands of aviation and while some early air stations were functionalist, others represented stylistic and regional variants of modern architecture such as Art Deco, streamlined modern, Italian rationalism and Scandinavian modernism. After the Second World War these so-called “three generations” of airports were followed by the “fourth, fifth and sixth generation.” Criticizing the idea of a development trajectory embedded in the concept of generations, I suggest that airports be instead classified by their organizational characteristics as the centralized and decentralized airport type, and further, by their operational system as the gate arrival, finger and satellite terminal. The basic difference between the centralized and the decentralized airport terminal type is that in the centralized model, airline counters, waiting areas and baggage handling are gathered in the main section of the terminal, whereas in the decentralized model a series of separate but interconnected units or satellites serve one or few airlines. While the former system facilitates central management and transfers between airlines, carriers often favor the latter, as it allows individualized customer service.

In the gate arrival terminal passengers walk directly from the gate to the aircraft parked on the apron. They may also be transported with a bus or a mobile lounge as at Dulles International Airport. In the pier finger terminal fingerlike concourses are connected to the aircraft with extendable and adjustable gangways – or open walkways as at the Athens International Airport. And in the satellite terminal, concourses and tunnels connect the main terminal into satellite buildings and aircraft parked around them – as in the TWA Terminal. In my view, the so-called “fourth-generation” airport denotes the centralized gate arrival or finger terminal of the forties and fifties, the “fifth-generation” airport refers especially to the decentralized satellite terminal built for the wide-bodied jets of the sixties, and the “sixth-generation” airport is the typical airport terminal of the seventies, when safety concerns resulted in the separation of open and secure areas.

Instead of following a predetermined development pattern, the terminal building was shaped by techno-social processes – including the changing logistics of air travel, the emergence of different propeller planes and jets, the construction and orientation of runways, and the airport’s urban location – which enforced certain formal and technical solutions while others stagnated. The visibility of these alternatives questions the idea that architecture developed along technology, and reveals various modernist discourses and technological possibilities that were present when modern architecture was invented. It is in this sense, following these alternatives, that I claim the dominant techno-deterministically defined modernism could be “uninvented.”[2] This would allow the histories to include the airport terminal as a building type that represents variants of architectural modernism and has a unique – and not simply causal – relationship to technology. After all, the airport terminal is the very avatar of technological modernity, without which the narrative of modern architecture is incomplete. Evaluating the state of postwar architecture Saarinen claimed in 1953: “The new architecture can be likened to a new product not yet on the assembly line, but well under way in the research laboratories. We should look into these laboratories to gain a picture of things to come.”[3] Based on this quote, the documented design process in the Saarinen office, and Bruno Latour’s definition of a laboratory (as the place where scientists work with their instruments),[4] I view Saarinen’s architectural practice as one of the many laboratories for a new architecture. Mapping such laboratories reveals a multifaceted view of postwar architecture, where modernism is no longer the universal panorama explaining architectural phenomena, but is rather explained by individual actors laboring – at their localized sites – to mediate a particular kind of modernity. This is to say, that modernisms are contingent and valid only within certain, historically, geographically, culturally and economically defined processes of modernization.

According to Eero Saarinen the office spent “so much time traveling, that we know only too well the physical comforts required by today’s travelers. Using materials and structural systems appropriate to this century of flight, we have tried to make a building which is functional, comfortable and dramatic.”[5] Therefore, the office approached the airport terminal design problem scientifically. They sent out teams with stopwatches and notepads to collect data on existing airports, researched the building type’s history, analyzed its organizational parameters and used scale modeling as a scientific tool to experiment with the terminal’s aesthetic form. They were especially concerned with the growing walking distances from curb to plane. Hence, Saarinen labored in the manner of what John Law has called a “heterogeneous engineer”[6] to negotiate technology and aesthetics. He managed networks including, not only clients, architects and engineers but also nonhuman actors such as the aircraft, Federal Aviation Agency’s regulations, and the various techno-social processes related to aviation.

With his laboratory-like methods Saarinen produced three revolutionary terminals. Trans World Airlines building became a landmark for TWA. It was a satellite terminal serving one airline within a decentralized airport city. Dulles International served as a monumental gateway to the nation. Its centralized gate arrival terminal and innovative mobile lounge concept awarded the then emerging bus system elegant space age aesthetics. Athens International was an essay in international modernism and an entrance point to the country. Typologically it was a centralized open finger terminal with the principle façade facing the airfield. Each one of these terminals found predecessors in the history of the building type, and gave the airport terminal a stunning aesthetic form, while innovatively interpreting its organizational principles.

What is more, Saarinen was negotiating technology and aesthetics not unlike the early modernists, who aimed to find a new synthesis in what they called the “new tradition” or the “machine age.” But Saarinen’s synthesis went further. He was not merely looking for an architectural equivalent of the machines: he was integrating technology into the very architectural object. In fact, the mobile lounge as a large, lounge-like vehicle employed at Dulles to transfer passengers from the terminal to the aircraft, became a constituent element of the new jet airport. It was a technological artifact, envisioned by an architect and realized by engineers, and it merged technology with the architectural object. Thus Saarinen’s buildings were not merely representing machine aesthetics in the manner of early modernists, but his buildings were (admittedly aesthetic) machines for transferring people from the landside to the aircraft.

In my study I show, how Saarinen’s engagement with technology, and his laboratory-like working methods reconciled the contradictions between modern architecture and its blind spot, the airport terminal. This synthesis allowed the terminal building to transcend its utilitarian-technological nature as transportation infrastructure and led to its inclusion in the history of modern architecture as a building type that has its own history and parameters for design. Hence, the airport terminal emerged as a specific landmark and a node in the networks of technology and modernity. According to Saarinen: “An airport should be an expression related to flight. It should make one feel the excitement of arrival and departure and the pleasures of adventures of travel.”[7]

My dissertation thus makes three contributions. It outlines the history of the airport terminal, emphasizing buildings that could have easily found their place in the canon of modern architecture. It explains the reasons for their exclusion and suggests ways to reduce the canon’s myopia towards variants of modernism. More broadly, this study contributes to our understanding of the historiography of modern architecture and its logic of including emergent buildings, by acknowledging the airport terminal as an emblematic building type of the twentieth century.

Cultural environments have proven a rich area for research, discussion and representation. This was demonstrated well in TAHITI6: the 2015 National Conference of Art History in Finland. It was an excellent event – and for me as a (still) relative newcomer to the Finnish academic community it was a rich and warmly welcoming experience. Also my first time visiting Jyväskylä – and definitely not the last.

I was told by several of the people involved with organizing TAHITI6 that the keynotes had been selected deliberately for coming from disciplines other than art history. And so we heard from Pauline von Bonsdorff from the University of Jyväskylä – a Professor in Art Education; Ola Wetterberg from the University of Gothenburg – a Professor of Conservation of Built Heritage; Tapio Heikkilä, a specialist from the Ministry of the Environment, and finally me – University Lecturer in Museology at the University of Helsinki, and an archaeologist and cultural heritage studies specialist by training, who also takes an interest, from time to time, in criminological issues.

I admired this strategy for inviting keynote speakers very much. For one thing, it meant I was invited to speak, and for another, it demonstrated just how interdisciplinary a concept like cultural environments is. And our papers were so varied as well. Pauline von Bonsdorff addressed the work of artists and novelists revisiting historical places and to get at the “invisible” stories as well as the dominant ones. Ola Wetterberg discussed how churches are managed and made use of as society changes, creating new uses but also new conservation challenges. Tapio Heikkilä talked about the study of and regard for landscape – noting the European Landscape Convention and its potential implications. These themes were all approached in various ways, situated in different disciplinary traditions, and all demonstrated how fluid, holistic and broad a term “cultural environment” itself is. Whose culture do we mean? What sort of environment? Can a natural environment also be cultural? Do landscapes have to be away from cities and built up areas? How does meaning and significance change over time?

For my own keynote, I chose to speak about the Academy of Finland Project with which I am currently involved: “Lapland’s Dark Heritage: Understanding the Cultural Legacy of Northern Finland’s WWII German Materialities within Interdisciplinary Perspectives” (http://blogs.helsinki.fi/lapland-dark-heritage, Lapland’s Dark Heritage, for short).[1] Back in February it was very much early days on the project still, before my research leave had even started. But speaking about the research at that early stage – and especially reflecting on the ways in which it relates to this concept of cultural environments – was incredibly useful.

Considering cultural environments within the context of what might be termed ‘dark’, ‘difficult’ or ‘contested’ heritage opens up possibilities for challenging the ways in which the “palimpsest of unspecified ‘history’ all around us”[2] can be understood. Scholars have already been discussing for some time how we might view and understand the ways in which heritage becomes “contested”[3], especially in cases where different political affiliations, or membership of different communities have a particular impact[4].

Another area of particular interest to our project and to tourism and social studies is the notion of ‘dark tourism’ – with Philip Stone’s “dark tourism spectrum”[5] a particularly useful tool in understanding how sites may become ‘lighter’ or ‘darker’ over time depending on how they are managed and the extent to which they become commoditized for touristic consumption.

In the context of Lapland’s Dark Heritage, as we encounter the ways in which different groups and individuals approach this historical period and its material remains, we have come across our own ‘spectrum’ of different types of engagement with the heritage. Among other actors, we have found hobbyist metal detectorists who engage with the material in the landscape in a very physical way, and we have found local history enthusiasts working hard to map and record Second World War sites, seeking means for preserving and raising awareness about them. We have also noticed an increased interest the Lapland War and the period before it generally – perhaps best illustrated by the Provincial Museum of Lapland’s recent exhibition “Wir waren Freunde” (http://www.arktikum.fi/EN/exhibitions/temporary-exhibitions/wir-waren-freunde-we-were-friends.html), and on a national level by the release of Lapland War-based drama Kätilö in cinemas across the country in 2015. That this year saw the 70th anniversary of the end of the Second World War may also go towards explaining this interest.

I all the engagements we have come across – from collectors of militaria through to those who recall the mass evacuations of Lapland – a central issue that remains important to all is place; the cultural environment itself. The significance of place – in terms of physical location as well as social construction – is considered in many studies connected to museology and heritage studies.[6] In the cases of traumatic and difficult histories, the cultural environment takes on yet more dimensions – illustrated brilliantly in Nina Sääskilahti’s paper at TAHITI6 which discussed the “spectral geography” left in Rovaniemi by the “ghosts” of destroyed buildings.

We are still only part of the way through our project, and still have people to meet and information to process and discuss. In the summer of 2016 we plan a public excavation, and we look forward to working with local residents, visitors and colleagues, and to seeing how different people choose to engage with this hands-on activity. What we have learned so far, however, is that cultural environments carry all kinds of meanings and significance. We are uncovering some, while other nuances may remain unknown or not articulable. Our experiences as academic researchers – from different backgrounds both in terms of discipline and place of origin – enriches the ways in which we are able to approach and consider this research (I work with specialists in the fields of archaeology, geography, cultural heritage studies and ethnology, and bring with me my own experiences of museology and – before my current post – criminology, and the team comes from northern, central and southern Finland, and in my case from England). As my academic experiences expand and develop, I am more and more convinced of the value of embracing multiple disciplines. It worked for TAHITI6, and it is enabling us to explore cultural environments in exciting and insightful ways.

 More than 20 years ago, I was studying at an art school in China. My school was located in Chongqing, a mountainous industrial city up Yangtze River. My classmates and I used to go to make sketches of shacks at the nearby squatter areas where many low-income people lived. When I was painting and drawing those shacks, I started to think of those people who lived inside. Lacking of running water and basic sanitation equipment, how would they live their daily life? Naturally, I started to think of why drawing or painting a slum is art, but making practical change to solve a social problem is not? Eventually, what decides whether a human action is or is not art and where is the boundary between them? That was maybe my initial seed of insight about the definition of art, the relationship between art and society, and the role of artists.

Today, socially engaged art has become a ubiquitous as well as ambiguous existence. It is ubiquitous because the term socially engaged art (SEA) has become a prevalent term, seen in tenets of various arts and cultural funding programs, in introductions of different arts workshops, in goal setting of social service organizations, and in course descriptions of Bachelor or Master Degree programs in arts colleges and universities. It is ambiguous because under the loose shelter of socially engaged art, there are many projects which vary in their goals, mechanisms and results. The complexity and the variety of forms of art’s social engagement still lack, as well as deserve, further exploration.

In my dissertation “Benefit-oriented Socially Engaged Art: Two Cases of Social Work Experiment”, I discuss a special type of socially engaged art— the artists and art educators engaging in social work experiments. These projects aim to propose concrete solutions for a specific social problem, focus on bringing benefits to the participants through providing them with art-based services. The mechanisms of these projects are epitomized by non-profit activities, targeted service users, long-term and sustainable operation, multi and cross-disciplinary cooperation, and concerted and collaborative approaches.

Firstly, my dissertation outlines the history of interaction of art and social work. It includes a constellation of art historians, curators and artists’ ideas of social engagement in contemporary art on one hand; and a number of social work researchers’ perception of artistic attributes in social work field and various artistic methods social workers apply on the other hand. Secondly, my dissertation explores how artists and art educators engage in social work through providing art-based service to marginalized individuals and groups. My dissertation is based on investigation of two projects, one in China and the other in Finland. The investigation includes a set of issues, such as the conceptions, mechanisms and effects of the two projects with a specific focus on the participants’ experiences and the artists’ roles. The investigation explores the participants’ participation experience instead of only listing their benefits as the outcome. It also explores the artists’ roles, how they consider their projects and combine their own aims and interests with the participants’ needs. Last, and most significantly, my dissertation discusses the aesthetic value of these artists’ involvement in social work. This research provides new insights into the understanding of how art can integrate into social work to benefit socially disadvantaged people and contributes to our understanding of the relation between art and social work, the definition of art, and the roles of artists.

The Chinese project, the Art for the Disabled Scheme, was initiated after a devastating earthquake that occurred in Sichuan on the 12th May, 2008. The earthquake caused more than 7,000 disabled; among them were many adolescents. After the earthquake, Chinese artist Zhou Chunya and his friends decided to establish a non-profit foundation, the 5Colours Foundation, to help the disabled students. Under the supervision and patronage of the foundation, the Art for the Disabled Scheme has been working as a long-term project for helping disabled young people through the integration of extracurricular art instruction and philanthropy. This project currently provides assistance to over 100 limb-disabled students. It won a Special Contribution Award in the selection of the 8th Award of Art China in 2013. However, although the Art for the Disabled Scheme has been the subject of massive Chinese media coverage, there has not been any previous attention from academia. The study of this project explores how a small group of limb-disabled students enhanced their social inclusion through participation in this project. This study identified five themes: obtaining financial and material support, improving mental well-being, promoting personal development, building positive self and group identity, and enhancing social development. The articulation of the five themes provides a comprehensive understanding of those disabled students’ participation experience, centring on the occurrence of positive changes in relation to the generation of considerable economic capital, human capital and social capital. Subsequently, it discusses three issues relating to the mechanism of this project: sustainability and efficient implementation, the multifaceted nature with respect to the integration of various resources, and the unique roles played by artists. The findings demonstrate that the cooperation of philanthropy and art in the mechanism of this project formed a very empowering whole and effectively facilitated the disabled students’ overall social participation.

The Finnish project, the Art and Culture Companions, was launched by Jyväskylä Art Museum in 2006. The basic concept of this project is training museum volunteers for providing low-threshold access to cultural activities for social groups in need—such as the elderly, the disabled, chronic or mental patients, and individuals who are not familiar with the cultural services. This project has fuelled the development of similar projects in different cities in Finland. The study of this project explores a small group of Finnish art museum volunteers’ involvement as mixed serious leisure enthusiasts. In accordance to their primary involvement, this study defined three types of mixed serious leisure enthusiasts: volunteer/hobbyist, amateur/volunteer and balanced participant. The first type primarily undertakes volunteer work, while as a secondary activity they pursue their own hobbies in the arts; the second type participates in this project mainly as amateur artists but occasionally doing volunteer work; the third type balances arts hobbies and voluntary work and had no obvious participation inclination. The articulation of the three types of participants reveals how the museum volunteers integrate their volunteer mission with their enthusiasm for the arts. This project highlights the integration of museum volunteerism and community arts participation as a creative solution for enhancing more people’s participation in art and cultural activities. Rather than only escorting people in museums and introducing artwork, the participants facilitated conversation among different people, presented artwork to socially marginalized groups, made art with them, and even inspired them to host their own exhibitions. They effectively benefited themselves, their service users, the museum, and the whole community. In a sense, this project is a community art project that is operated within the framework of museum volunteering. It is also a museum volunteering project that has expanded the meaning of museum volunteering—moving toward the people beyond the walls of the museum and using artistic activities as a way to undertake social service.

Based on an investigation of the two projects, this dissertation sets forth the concept of “benefit-oriented socially engaged art” and attempts to reveal the meaning of benefit-oriented socially engaged art practices and their position within contemporary art and culture as a whole. The most debatable issue within the field of socially engaged art centres on the contradiction between social acclaim and aesthetic value, which reflect a dichotomist stance between art and social scientific field, and spotlighting the confusion between art’s autonomy referring to its position independent from instrumental justification and heteronomy referring the blurring of art and life.

Claire Bishop points out that the critique of socially engaged art is framed by two judgments: social judgment and artistic judgment—which need “different criteria”.[1] French philosopher Rancière’s argument about the politics of aesthetics is significant for the critique of socially engaged art. According to Rancière, aesthetics means “the infinite openness of the field of art”, which ultimately leads to the elimination of the boundaries “between art and non-art, between artistic creation and anonymous life”.[2] Aesthetics itself has two politics. One is the politics of “art becoming life”, in which the aesthetic experience resembles other forms of experiences and leads to art’s self-elimination. The other is the politics of the “resistant form”, in which the aesthetic experience derives from the separation of art from other forms of activity and resists any transformation into a form of life. These two politics of aesthetics, although opposite, exist in tension with one another.[3]

Due to the point that the claim of benefit-oriented practices for efficacy is more prominent and convincing than their claim for aesthetic values, these projects are included in art discourses at a very debatable position. This dissertation argues that benefit-oriented practices still embody aesthetic tension, which draws these projects from other ameliorative social actions. The articulation of aesthetic tension of benefit-oriented socially engaged art is scrutinized from three pairs of contradicting norms, values and perspectives: practical and symbolic social action, the artworld and the non-artworld, and professionalism and amateurism.

Even though the functional purpose of benefit-oriented socially engaged art evidently overpasses their symbolic purpose, benefit-oriented practices still have symbolic significance. In reality, these projects are more like creative and empathetic gestures and encouraging examples to highlight social issues and show the possibility of solutions. These practices may not work in typical traditional art institutions, but they keep up with the continuously changing artworld, and enlarge the understanding of art and aesthetics through stirring debates within the artworld. The artists and art educators’ engagement in social work experiments also questions the conventional notion of professional and amateur, not only in the art field but also in social fields.

From one perspective, benefit-oriented socially engaged art further eliminates the border between art and non-art, and between art and society. When art expands into society, everyday life and other disciplines, aesthetic tension continuously challenges the understanding of what art is and what good art is, as well as reveals the openness and flexibility of the “artworld” concept.[4] While from another perspective, the existing tension reveals that the full fusion of art and non-art is impossible. Though having an expanding boundary, art still draws itself from the other aspects of life.

Nowadays, more and more critics incline to develop a more holistic perspective on socially engaged art, a pragmatic and inclusive attitude to these practices. Many non-profit projects, whether they are artist-initiated or non-artist initiated, are included into socially engaged art, which shakes up foundations of art discourse. In this changing world, creativity is far more crucial to our survival and wellbeing. Because of its unbounded imagination and expression, artistic creativity is able to transcend the boundaries between different domains.[5] Artists, due to their capability of synthesizing different knowledge fields, integrating various social sectors and institutions, and mobilizing expertises from different disciplines, can often provide holistic solutions for problems confronting human societies. The artists engaging in social work, through integrating their skills and knowledge into the leadership over these projects, are actively changing the world at the grassroots level.
The past three decades have witnessed an unprecedented ecological crisis in China; however, there has been very little study of ecological concern in Chinese contemporary art. Ecological awareness has emerged in Chinese contemporary art since the early 1990s. This paper explores the various cultural factors that are involved. First, the rising ecological awareness in Chinese art in the 1990s is a corollary of ideological changes, both in social politics and in art. Chinese contemporary art in the 1990s experienced a constantly ongoing social turn to counter the dominance of the market and to continue the critical spirit. When this inner need in Chinese contemporary art encountered the thorough re-examination of the anthropocentric view caused by a severe environmental and ecological crisis, a group of artists started to focus on environmental and ecological wellbeing, as a primary concern. Secondly, the rising ecological awareness has been encouraged by a revival of Chinese traditional culture and art since the 1980s. This important factor has encouraged artists to focus on the traditional aspects of ecological concern and to reintroduce it into contemporary art. Thirdly, the rising ecological awareness reveals the impact of grassroots environmentalism in China. The analysis of the cultural environment behind the emergence of ecological consciousness in Chinese contemporary art provides considerable help in understanding the development of ecological art in contemporary China.

    I’ve wanted to apologize to you so many times.
    They say you’re vile, polluted, and poisonous.
    But I remember when you were clean and pure.
    They say water is the Mother of Life.
    Look what your children have done to you.
    I know this is more than you can bear.
    Sometimes, I wonder if you regret it,
    Regret giving us life…[1]

At the end of the Chinese movie Personal Tailor (2013), the chief actor Yang Zhong made this confessional address towards a severely polluted river. His performance Apologize to Nature reminds us of the ecological and environmental crisis in China today and implies an aesthetic inquiry into this issue.

In the past three decades, the rise of the Chinese economy at the expense of the environment has resulted in an unprecedented ecological crisis. According to an American researcher, Elizabeth Economy, China’s environmental problem is caused by the exhaustion of natural resources, such as water, land, forest, and mineral resources, and at the same time unregulated industrial emissions and waste disposal, due to a dramatic increasing demand of natural resources and energy.[2] Domestically, this has caused many secondary impacts. Vast areas have been turned into wasteland due to deforestation and overgrazing; most rivers and ground water are polluted by toxic industrial waste; and hundreds of millions of urban and rural habitants suffer from sandstorms, smog, traffic jams, noise, water shortages, and frequent mudslides and floods. Globally, China has become the world’s largest greenhouse gas discharger and a significant contributor of global climate change and biodiversity loss. Meanwhile, environmental degradation and pollution also pose challenges to the social and economic welfare of the people in relation to migration, public health, social unrest, and declining economic productivity, to name but a few.

Chinese researchers Zhang Quanming and Wang Yude identified 10 major ecological problems that China is facing; among these, six are especially crucial: defects in decision making; land problems, such as soil erosion, desertification and land impoverishment; overpopulation; water shortages and pollution; air pollution; and depletion of forest resources. Other significant issues include waste disposal, noise pollution, species loss, and traffic.[3]

Although the disastrous environmental pollution and ecological deterioration in China have drawn wide attention; up to the present, the most influential studies in the field of visual culture have focused on cinema. Chinese filmmakers have made a series of movies in which environmental and ecological problems were discussed from various perspectives.[4] In other fields of visual arts, the scholarly study of ecological consciousness is underdeveloped. Although there have been sporadic studies on individual Chinese artists and their works—for instance, Sheldon H. Lu (2007)[5] and Chu Kiu-wai (2012)[6] touched on the ecological concern in avant-garde photography—the study of ecological art has never been established as a canon in the field of art studies in China.

In the late 1990s, a group of Chinese artists moved the focus of their work to environmental and ecological problems. Their work, although demonstrating a close connection with traditional aesthetics and landscape art, is different from that of traditional landscape artists, who merely poeticize the harmony between nature and humans. Up to the present, studies on ecological awareness in Chinese contemporary art have generally been under the loose heading of conceptual art. The emergence of ecological awareness in Chinese contemporary art has been influenced by a set of social and cultural factors; therefore, having a thorough analysis of these factors is necessary when exploring the historical course of ecological art in China. Instead of merely concerning the aesthetic aspects, studies of art phenomena often refer to the cultural environment—established beliefs, values, traditions, customs, laws, and practices in a given society in which art is produced, perceived and distributed. The discussion of the cultural environment reminds us of the external and internal factors that influence art. Internal factors centre on the aesthetic aspects of artistic production. External factors focus on the relationship between art and other spheres of culture and society, such as the social, historical, political, economic, religious, ideological, and scientific factors surrounding artistic production.

An understanding of these external factors is particularly significant to ecological art, based on the palpable fact that instead of merely being an art genre, the emergence and development of ecological art is mainly driven by a mission. Art driven by a mission, according to Suzi Gablik, requires that the artists should be “encouraged to be integral to the social, environmental, or spiritual life of the community.”[7] To reach this goal, ecological artists adopt ideas and methods from many disciplines and collaborate with specialists from other fields.

As pointed out by Linda Weintraub, due to the interdisciplinary nature of ecological art, the examination of the field’s artistic innovation must correlate with real societal changes, and the evaluation of its creativity and innovation must be synchronized with the extent and intensity of these changes.[8] Weintraub suggested a scheme to examine four aspects of ecological art: art genres, ecological issues, ecological approaches, and the artists’ strategies.[9] Art genres refer to art forms, materials, and mediums, including paint, print, sculpture, performance, photography, video, biological art, generative art, social practice, digital art, installation, public art, and design. Artists’ strategies refer to the artists’ intentions and methods, such as visualization, metaphorization, activation, intervention, agitation, dramatization, and investigation. Ecological issues involve energy, waste, climate change, technology, habitat, sustainability, and resources. Ecoapproaches involve theories in ecological and environmental studies, including sustainable development and the following types of ecology: social, deep, restoration, urban, industrial, human, and ecosystem.[10] Weintraub’s scheme maps a comprehensive framework for the examination of ecological art with special concern for a vast range of non-art disciplines and areas of knowledge.

Another art curator, Andrew Brown, categorized six different approaches applied by artists, each representing a particular level of engagement with the physical world. The first category is review—artists passively observing, recording, and reflecting natural processes and human activities. The second type is reform—artists taking their inspirations from natural materials and processes, making creative use of nature by transforming it into aesthetic forms. The third type is research—artists exploring the function of nature and humans’ interactions with it. The fourth type is reuse—artists re-examining humans’ exploitation of the nature. The fifth type is re-create—artists seeking creative solutions to environmental problems, not only in terms of art practice but also to realize a more ecological lifestyle. The sixth type is reacting—artists actively engaging as eco-activists within an art context and using creative means to reach their environmental goals.[11]

Ecological art is based on a reflection of the contradiction between humanity and nature—in our time, mainly the contradiction between development on the one hand and the protection and restoration of the ecological system on the other. The conflict between humanity and nature always exists, changing based on the time and place; therefore, ecological art is an ongoing, maybe never-ending process. Studies of the cultural environment not only involve the status quo of ecological art but also record its past and project its future. Still, many ecological art practices, if not all, are site-specific, depending on the artist’s understanding of a specific site’s natural conditions and cultural contexts.

Barbara C. Matilsky noted that ecological art is rooted not only in natural sciences but also in cultural history.[12] It is through culture that nature and natural sciences can enter the view of artists and art historians. Cultural factors influence different artists to engage in environmental and ecological issues, such as how to reflect on specific ecological issues; how to choose their breakthrough points and methodologies; finally how to decide on the themes, content, and imagery of ecological artworks; and how to have those works considered and distributed in society. Most importantly, the emerging ecological awareness in Chinese art relates to a thorough re-examination of the anthropocentric worldview and a reassessment (since the 1990s) of the relationship between humanity and nature. As pointed out by Sheldon H. Lu, during the Maoist era, Chinese ideology was dominated by the Maoist philosophy of struggle, which was implemented not merely in dealing with the class struggle in human societies but also in dealing with the relationship between humanity and nature. The philosophy of struggle emphasized the infinite capability of the human will to conquer nature, commanding an extreme anthropocentric attitude toward nature. During the Maoist era, this extreme anthropocentric attitude—the ambition of human beings to change (and eventually completely triumph over) nature—was depicted in countless grandiose visual artworks and expressed in a widespread folk song of the Great Leap Forward:

    There’s no Jade God up in heaven,
    Nor Dragon King deep in the water.
    I am exactly Jade God and Dragon King.
    There comes my loud cry,
    And all the mountains and valleys shall make way for me.
    There I come!
    There I am!

After Mao’s death, China launched the Opening and Reform policy. The Chinese Communist Party established economic development as the central task of the country and the party. This narrow-minded pursuit of modernization was measured merely by the annual economic growth rate, which was very high in this era. It seemed that anything could be sacrificed in the name of economic development. Sheldon H. Lu pointed out that, due to this high energy and resource consuming industrial development mode and the poor supervision of pollution, a large part of the country was in fact becoming a global trash heap and wasteland.[13] By the 1990s, both the Chinese government and the people had recognized that this mode was not sustainable.

The rapid economic growth in China during the 1980s and 1990s and the increasing ecological and environmental problems synchronized with a major change in Chinese contemporary art. As pointed out by Chinese art critic Lu Peng, the final legitimization of the market economy after 1989 resulted in the combination of political power and capital. When political power gradually gave way to economic power, the market became the new facilitator of art development; art exhibitions and auctions were conducted in such a market system. The Guangzhou Biennale 1992, as a landmark in Chinese contemporary art, marked the coming of a new era when economic forces would fully engage in Chinese contemporary art. This was memorized by Chinese artist Chen Lei: “Now, everybody has realized that success is evaluated only by money and related power; there is no difference in art field.”[14] After the mid-1990s, Chinese contemporary art was gradually incorporated into a global marketing system and an attitude of cynicism and bitter irony about consumerism became a repeatable business strategy.[15] As an effort to counter the manoeuvre of money, a group of artists started to shift from the general humanistic concern that was highlighted in the Chinese art of the 1980s to a more local and individual concern whilst still maintaining a critical posture. In that period, those artists who resided in coastal regions and big cities first felt the contradiction between blatant materialism and ecological disaster, leading to issues related to public health and social justice. Therefore, the rising ecological awareness in Chinese art since the 1990s is a corollary of ideological changes. When the deep re-examination of the anthropocentric view caused by the severe environmental and ecological crisis met the constantly ongoing social turn in Chinese contemporary art, environmental and ecological wellbeing became the primary concerns of many Chinese artists.

Shang Yang is regarded as a pioneer among Chinese contemporary artists who expresses ecological awareness in their work. He has been taking landscape as the source of his work; however, his work is not traditional landscape painting, as it neither depicts our instinctive obsession with nature nor allows the audience to appreciate it in tranquillity. As pointed out by Wang Min’an, “Shang Yang’s work has isolated itself from both the Chinese and Western traditions of landscape painting.”[16] Shang Yang’s real interest is expressing his concern about humans’ relationship with the environment. The scarred landscape, which was exploited and spoiled by humans in his paintings, is not for leisure and aesthetics; rather, it is like a warning message to the audience that humans’ home is on the verge of destruction.[17]

The basic landscape of postmodern society is chaotic and fragmented, with entirely unrelated things juxtaposed together. In 1993, Shang Yang moved to Guangzhou. In the early 1990s, as the forward region of the Chinese Reforming and Opening Policy, Guangzhou was a strange mixture of humans and building, traditional and modern, tall and low, stylish and rustic. Quoting Shang Yang’s words, “The streets [in Guangzhou] were full of motor bicycles and noise; everyone and everything were rushing towards money. The restless I felt everywhere reminded me of volcanoes.”

In 1994, Shang Yang had breathing difficulty and was sent to the hospital. His experiences in the hospital further triggered his thinking on the relationship between the body and society. In Shang Yang’s paintings, diseased black lungs are a symbol of a pathologic society that is overcrowded, polluted, unbalanced, and dominated by money-worship and consumerism. The feeling of suffocation pervades in almost everyone’s lives and living spaces. Thus, volcanoes, lungs, X-ray film of diseased human bodies, and diagnosis gradually became a series of sign images and themes in his works in Guangzhou.[18]

As a painter, Shang Yang was trying to reveal the chaos and disorder of the postmodern world and the alienation of the human mind in a harmonious picture. Yu Hong, a Chinese art critic and Shang Yang’s friend, stated that, though many Chinese artists realized the confusions of the postmodern, few succeeded in representing them in paintings as Shang Yang did.[19] Taking the example of his famous Great Landscape series, which drew inspiration from folk Baina cloth, he found a collaged pattern to juxtapose fragmented pieces of different colours and shapes on canvas without hurting the integrity and harmony of the whole picture. He integrated the collaged pattern of Baina cloth with the outline of a massif, which he called “combined structure of Baina cloth and mountains.” Later, this structure gradually evolved into a “profile structure of stratums.” He randomly inserted items from different times in the history into his paintings; for instance, he included dinosaurs, cigarettes, cars, tall buildings and humans. This became the basic pattern of the series of Great Landscape series. Ecological consciousness in contemporary art is related to a revival of traditional culture and art since the 1980s, which has encouraged artists to focus on traditional ecological concerns and introduce them into contemporary art. The Cultural Revolution that started in May 1966 was a catastrophe for Chinese culture. Buddhist monasteries, Taoist temples, historical heritage sites, traditional paintings, statues, and calligraphy works, and other precious antiquities were systematically damaged in the name of breaking the evil feudalist tradition.

After the Cultural Revolution, especially after the Third Plenary Meeting of the 11th Session of the CCP at the end of 1978, taking class struggle as the central task was officially abolished, and the working focus of the Party and the whole nation was from then on shifted to economic construction. Beginning in the 1980s, accompanied by reflection and criticism of the catastrophic Cultural Revolution, Chinese people’s attitudes toward traditional culture substantially changed. This was followed by a revival of traditional culture in the 1980s and 1990s. Traditional philosophy, literature, art, music, dance, drama and folklore came back to life. The state made a huge investment in restoration of and research into traditional culture and art. Under this circumstance, researchers and artists attached great importance to ecological awareness in traditional culture and art.

Chinese traditional culture highly valued a harmonious relationship between human beings and nature. The unity of nature and man is the basic proposition in Chinese philosophy and aesthetics. For example, the great reverence for nature is exemplified by Taoist concepts, such as “to follow and learn from nature” and the idea that “nature is the most beautiful”; and the Confucian metaphorical connection between a gentleman’s virtue and nature expresses a similar idea. The unity of nature and man, bearing the deep ecological concern of Chinese culture, has a significant influence on architecture, gardening, painting, sculpture, and literacy. In visual arts, traditional Chinese landscape painting (Shan-Shui, literally “mountains and waters”) epitomizes the unity of nature and humans. Shan-Shui represents the mutual joy between nature and humanity and embodies the organic synthesis of the humanization of nature and the naturalization of humanity. It is fair to say that Shan-Shui built up a spiritual homeland for both Chinese artists and the common people. However, in the Maoist era, the tranquil and serene spirit of Shan-Shui painting was considered incompatible with the philosophy of struggle. Traditional landscape painting, while not banned outright, was overlooked. In fact, many artists of the Maoist era added telegraph poles, trains, and factory chimneys to traditional landscape paintings in praise of industrialization and modernization.

Here we still take Shang Yang as an example. In 1997, he left Guangzhou to work at Capital Normal University in Beijing. He then started to integrate Chinese traditional hand-scroll painting into his work; he borrowed the background pattern from the Shan-Shui painting of Dong Qichang, who was the most renowned artist of Chinese classic landscape painting.[20] To Shang Yang, Dong Qichang was a symbol; Dong’s painting and theory conveyed an Eastern imagination of nature, best representing the harmony between nature and humanity, which is inspiring for modern people. However, the word “project” reminds us of the behaviour of modern people, so the two words together create a specious feeling.

Shang Yang regards his Dong Qichang Project series as a “serene expression” of the denaturalization of nature and the horrible changes in the relationship between humanity and nature, which is a continuation of the Great Landscape. As Shang Yang realized, the previous pure nature had been eroded through the progress of civilization; he adopted a worn and vague pattern rooted in traditional Chinese landscape painting whilst inserting other elements, such as computer-generated images, to reach a parodic effect. He mentioned:

    We are too arrogant for this world; although everybody is talking about this issue, we still obstinately stick to this wrong course. For example, we all know the harm of nuclear weapon for humankind, but we are still producing more. I think humanity is a combination of wisdom and blindness. I believe that the artists have a responsibility to discuss these issues to raise awareness among more people.[21]

Dong Qichang Project-2 is the first and the most renowned piece in this series. When asked about his initiative, Shang Yang remarked upon the memorialization of the “disappearing Three Gorges.” In his work, fishes are swimming in the sky and a submarine is emerging among the mountains, which implies that the mountains have been submerged under water. He said:

I feel so sad about the disappearance of the Three Gorges. Unlike the Great Wall or the Forbidden Palace, which are relics of human culture, the Three Gorges is the result of hundreds of millions of years, a masterpiece of Nature. Now, due to the decision of the government—which might be wrong from a long-term view—it was submerged under water. The ecological crisis and natural disaster caused by this kind of behaviour might not be felt immediately, but how about in the future? For short-term interest, we abused and ruined the property that belongs to the future generations. I wanted to express my sadness, frustration and anger in this work.[22]

Since the Dong Qichang Project, inspirations from ancient Chinese culture and art have been highlighted in Shang Yang’s work. In recent years, Shang Yang has more focused on mixed media. For example, in his bamboo-themed works made in 2013 and 2014, he put bamboo, scroll paper and cloth (which are often used in traditional Chinese art) together with iron, asphalt, and putty. The contradiction between the opposed types of materials emphasizes the conflicts between agricultural civilization and industrial civilization, and between protection and development.

Another artist, Yao Lu, employed photography as a medium to re-create the imagery of ancient Shan-Shui painting. His pictures look like green-and-blue landscape paintings from a distance, but as one gets closer, one can recognize that the waterfalls, cliffs, mists, and clouds of traditional Chinese landscape painting are in fact rubbish, landfills, and clouds of dust on construction sites. The heavy blackish greenness comes from the green dust cloths used on construction sites to prevent dust from blowing away.[23] This parodic contradiction between appearance and reality speaks to the sarcastic consequences of urbanization. For Yao Lu, traditional landscape art is a symbol which no longer serves the pursuit of beauty and harmony; rather, it brings the viewer unexpected sights in order to create a more powerful impact and to promote higher-level thinking about the relationship between contemporary humanity and nature.

In addition to traditional landscape painting, Chinese artists draw inspiration from traditional culture and art. Trained as a sculptor, Zhan Wang chose stainless steel rockeries as his main medium. Rockeries are natural stones usually set as decorations in traditional Chinese gardens to satisfy people’s need for the illusion of dwelling in nature. Zhan Wang’s rockeries, however, were made of sheets of stainless steel hammered over the surface of real rocks. His work also reveals the contradictions between manmade and natural creation, between modern industrialization and traditional culture, and between the past and the future. Last but not the least in significance, rising ecological awareness was fuelled by grassroots environmentalism in China. The Chinese leadership has developed a five-part strategy to address environmental problems: policy guidance from the centre; delegation of power to local governments; cooperation with the international community; development of grassroots environmentalism; and enhancement of the legal system. This combined environmental protection strategy offered artists vast possibilities for engaging in this issue. Wide participation of social forces and the media in environmental protection was undertaken through several aspects: the emergence of domestic and international non-profit and non-governmental organizations and the roles these organizations played; the endeavours of groups of entrepreneurs and other individuals in environmental protection; and the roles played by the media. All of these aspects opened the way for artists to engage in interdisciplinary thinking and practice; artists could choose their own way to collaborate with these social forces and media.

Reviewing the footprints of Chinese artists in the 1990s, we shouldn’t overlook the ecological and environmental art activities in Chengdu, Sichuan Province. In the mid-1990s, the Chengdu government launched the Chengdu Fu-Nan Rivers Comprehensive Revitalization Project, a five-year plan focusing on environmental remediation along the Fu and Nan rivers. From July to August, 1995, American environmental artist Betsy Damon and a group of artists gathered in Chengdu and organized the first Defender of Water exhibition. The artists took installation and performance as mediums and expanded their art to the public space by means of a group exhibition. Chinese artist Dai Guangyu made a performance titled Water Index Laid aside for a Long Time. He took a series of photographs of ordinary people and, in a public display, dipped these photos in shallow dishes of polluted river water, allowing the prints to become yellow and decomposed. The exhibition sites, such as streets, bookstores, city walls, and rivers, were included in the artists’ works as the materials and mediums. This was the first time in Chinese contemporary art that artists had openly expressed their concern about the antagonistic relationship between humans and nature in front of the public and the media. The Chengdu government looked very favourably on these activities. After the exhibition, the artists held a second exhibition in Lhasa, Tibet, in 1996; a third exhibition (“Source Life”) in Du Jiangyan (a still-functioning ancient irrigation project near Chengdu) in 1997; and a forth exhibition (“Release Water”) in Chengdu at the turn of the millennium.[24]

The positive interaction among artists, local government, the public and the media played a very positive role in raising people’s ecological consciousness and improving Chengdu’s environment. Although there have been ecological performances in other cities in China, no other ecological art activity has been as successful as the artists’ endeavour in Chengdu in terms of scale and social impact.

In particular, after the first Defender of Water exhibition, Betsy Damon, in cooperation with staff from the Fu-Nan Rivers Restoration Bureau, designed the Living Water Garden. The project began in 1996 and was completed in 1998. The Living Water Garden, located in the city centre of Chengdu, is a functioning water filtration and purification plant. Each day, 200 m3 of polluted river water winds through this ecological treatment system of ponds and filters, finally becoming clear and clean. It is also an environmental education centre—revealing the process of water purification in such an understandable way successfully fits the purposes of teaching and inspiration.[25] Bringing together artistic quality, functionality, education and entertainment, this project won 1998 United Nations Habitat Award. In the Chinese case, severe environmental and ecological degradation combined with the swiftly changing political ideology of the 1990s; the revival of traditional culture and art; and the environmental policies and strategies have branded the developmental history of Chinese ecological art. The examination of rising ecological awareness in Chinese art during the past two decades reveals two prominent characteristics: roots in studio arts and a close connection with traditional aesthetic idea and landscape art.

While Western ecological art is more rooted in land art and earth work,[26] Chinese ecological art has its root in studio art, as the artists’ reflection on the problems caused by human society. It is worth noting that there was no massive environmental movement in China, nor was there an influential work like Silent Spring. In addition, there was no prevailing land art or earth art to serve as a precursor of ecological art. The emergence of ecological awareness in Chinese contemporary art has a relatively short history and limited affection. No Chinese artists have involved themselves in ecological or environmental issues from the beginning of their art careers. Instead, they have simply dedicated a certain period of time—the length of the period differs from artist to artist—to being involved in ecological concerns. This speaks to why Chinese ecological art first emerged in the studio and why most artists’ works belong to the category of studio art.

Though most Chinese artists who have environmental and ecological concerns still focus on studio art, some artists have moved their work out of their studio. Wang Jianwei is one of them. In 1993-1994, he undertook a project named Circulation-Sowing and Harvesting. He worked with a group of farmers to cultivate wheat, observing and recording the whole process. His work blurs the boundaries between natural law, human behaviour (such as agricultural labour), and artistic practice. This work brings the process of plant growth and the natural cycle—both of which are beyond art—into the art-making process and includes the natural cycle in the content of art.[27] Another artist, Huang Yan, dedicated himself to making rubbings of the architectural details of demolished buildings in urban spaces. In ancient China, rubbing was widely used by scholars for copying stone inscriptions. Employing traditional rubbing as a medium, Huang Yan has called for the restoration of those disappearing spaces. From 1993 to 1996, he performed his art in many Chinese cities, including Changchun, Beijing, Xi’an, Guiyang, Chongqing, Shanghai, Suzhou, and Nanjing.[28]

Beginning in 2000, Zhan Wang gradually moved his practices from museums and galleries to different venues. He placed a stainless artificial rock on Mount Everest at a height of 8848 meters, let it float out on the open sea, and even attempted to send it into outer space by launching it on a rocket.[29] Instead of presenting the destruction of the environment and ecological system as a stationary phenomenon, these artists’ practices are more involved with the process; the artists attempt to present ecological issues as dynamic through process-oriented projects.

In recent years some artists of a younger generation have found more direct ways to become involved with this issue. Their practices are based on an understanding that environmental and social injustice are intertwined and there is a need to seek a holistic combination of environmental justice and social justice to reach a more sustainable future. For example, inspired by the National Rural Reconstruction Movement (led by James Yen) of the 1930s, an artist, Ou Ning, established the Bishan Commune in 2011 in order to form a new ecological lifestyle by integrating preservation of cultural and artistic heritage with villager education and rural economic development. This project generated international reverberations and much debate, highlighting a constellation of crucial issues concerning artists’ attitudes and positions and their interactions with the larger public.[30] Though sociologists have investigated the Bishan Project, a systematic examination of these artists and their work from the perspective of ecological art is still missing.

Reflection on the ecological crisis that threatens human society became involved with a self-reflection and with a revival of traditional culture and art. That has provided an example of how Chinese artists could relate their own history and culture while seeking a solution to the ecological and environmental crisis. However, it is worth noting here that the more balanced relationship between humanity and nature in ancient China only existed in a philosophical and aesthetic sense; at the practical level, Chinese agrarian civilization was not so environmentally friendly. It was, in Mark Elvin’s words, a type of unsustainable development.[31] Pressured by increasing population and poor productivity, for thousands of years, Chinese peasants and farmers devastated virgin forests for rice cultivation, resulting in severe soil erosion and desertification in many areas in China. According to Zhang Quanming and Wang Yude, the problem of soil erosion in China can be dated back to the Warring States period (BC 475-221).[32] However, the ancient Chinese practices of deforestation and dramatic alterations to the landscape are selectively overlooked in contemporary artists’ practices. This may imply a common view among Chinese artists that they are too idealistic about ancient Eastern civilization, which they regard as the opposite of Western modernization and industrialization.

To conclude, during the past two decades, Chinese artists have endeavoured to express ecological concern and to enhance public awareness of these issues. They introduced new ideas, materials, forms and methods to provide provisional and innovative solutions. The evolution of Chinese ecological art demonstrates unique qualities, and it should not be understood simply as a migration of global environmental and ecological art. The analysis of the cultural environment behind the emergence of ecological consciousness in Chinese contemporary art provides considerable help in understanding the origin, course of development, approaches, and tendencies of Chinese contemporary ecological art.

A verbal description is always related to a corresponding cognitive frame. This is also true of the visual arts, where the mode of representation is, furthermore, subjected to conventional codes of representation to which the recipient is expected to respond. With regard to the mimetic arts, the recipient will succumb to illusion by way of projection, i. e. imagination. As phenomenology has shown, this process of conjuring up the (absent) signified object involves the viewer’s identification, an emotional response, and recollection. The question of why certain (art-historical) periods feature specific motifs and why the public has been willing to accept them is a sociological one. Yet, it has to some extent been answered by iconology, which deals with cognitive cultural frames, while the qualitative aspect of depiction reflects the transformation of an object perceived and conjured up in the artist’s mind. Description is always the outcome of a mental process, yet in contrast to courses triggered by verbal description and communication, the mode of representation in the visual arts remains more closely related to deeper, even unconscious strata of the brain, generating emotions and associations. A description, verbal or pictorial, oscillates between the reference and the referent (the cognitive frame) as encompassed by the mind.

Description is, no doubt related to a mental concept.[1] This ‘cognitive frame’, however, according to Paul de Man, may show cracks. A metaphor, describing an object or person or referring to a specific significance, is embedded in another cognitive framework, but the properties of a person or object described by way of attributions may prove to be haphazard. A semantic definition of ‘cognitive science’ may help to elucidate the wide range of meanings related to the term and to the ‘cognitive frame’ as well:

‘Cognitive science’ is the interdisciplinary scientific study of the mind and its processes. It examines what cognition is, what it does and how it works. It includes research on intelligence and behavior, especially focusing on how information is represented, processed, and transformed (in faculties such as perception, language, memory, attention, reasoning, and emotion), within nervous systems. Cognitive science consists of multiple research disciplines, including psychology, artificial intelligence, philosophy, neuroscience, linguistics, and anthropology. It spans many levels of analysis, from low-level learning and decision mechanisms to high-level logic and planning; from neural circuitry to modular brain organization. […] Cognitive scientists work collectively in hope of understanding the mind and its interactions with the surrounding world.”[2]

During the recent decades the historical dimension of cognition, the role of memory and the framing in social and cultural history have gained ground. Philosophy, the human sciences and cultural history may ask different questions and use different tools and cognitive frames than the natural sciences, but nevertheless they contribute to the enlargement of ‘the horizon of lived human experience’. Needless to say, art history takes part in this endeavor. The use of the term ‘cognitive frame’ seems legitimate here as well.
As for ‘description’ which is the issue here, two levels of cognition come to the fore: the function of perception, identification, and communication in the narrower sense, the lower level of pre-iconographical subject matter. The second ‘high level’ of cognition addressed here deals with the merging of form and content, also with reference to the prevailing cultural situation. In both cases, problems of semantics arise which will be discussed in the latter part of this paper.

Hence, in the history of art descriptions refer to different cognitive frames. Moreover, the transformation of the impression of a painting into another media, from ‘a language centered epistemological programmed’ (Wittgenstein) to a description of an image, turns out to be a complex process. A certain inconsistency may also arise through flaws in verbalization. The frame in quest is manifold and can encompass technique, codes of representation, mimesis and likeness, symbolic significance, and even general cultural items. Paul de Man gauged the relation between image and text as incommensurable, but some art historians such as Mieke Bal have questioned boundaries between literary and visual analysis, following up the modalities of representation while ‘reading pictures’ in order to discover the strategies and meaning behind them.[3]

Notwithstanding the differences of the media, I still presume that all descriptions refer to cognitive frames, and so do images as well. Jacob Burckhardt once complained that in trying to describe a certain work of art the art historian can only encircle it. He never arrives at the heart of the matter, owing to the ineffable process of artistic transformation. This puzzling fact of creativity and mimesis, the making and matching, has been discussed at length by Gombrich, ultimately leaving the scholar baffled by the ‘wonder of simultaneity’.[4] This seems to be confirmed by neurobiology. According to Wolf Singer, visual stimuli address mental faculties which are less related to discursive logic than to emotion and expression, situated in the pre-cortical structure of the brain.[5] Maybe the use of metaphors in poetry does, after all, help to bridge the gap between the representation of objects and the poet ‘thinking in pictures’, using images as a means of literary expression.

The winner of the Nobel prize in medicine in 2000, Eric Kandel, has devoted his life to brain research, the interaction between the unconscious, cognitive psychology, biology, and bioneurology, with special regard to the fundamental faculty of memory both in bioneurology and humanities, e. g. creativity and the arts. (Also Wolf Singer tried to bridge the gap in 1994 – cf. end note 5). Kandel’s book The Age of Insight from 2012 will probably become indispensable for a wider public reflecting upon creativity and communication and to those interested in the crossover of cognitive science and humanities. The three basic functions of description in literature and other media as listed by Wolf are:

a)   a means of identifying objects and phenomena and referring to them for communicative purposes by means of characteristic attributions,

b)  a means of vividly representing objects and phenomena to the recipient,

c)   a means of approaching reality in a seemingly objective way rather than as a means of explanation and interpretation.[7]

These basics are also relevant with regard to aesthetics.

The everyday function of description as identification through attribution with special regard to absent phenomena is very much the same in the realm of the visual arts. Panofsky speaks of the primary or natural subject matter and the act of interpretation, referring to it as a “pre-iconographical description”.[8] The problem arising here is that even in the case of a plain description, the mode of representation is inextricably linked to convention and tradition, both from the artistic point of view and with regard to the spectator. Any kind of communication in everyday life presupposes a constant process of identification, a make-believe that encompasses the willingness of the recipient to succumb to illusion: listening to a narration or perceiving an object as appearing ‘real’ in a painting – the psychological readiness “to adjust the mental set” (Gombrich) in order to internalize the object described and its style can be defined as a process of identification in aesthetics as well.
The process of identification and recognition discussed so far becomes even more complex if we turn to phenomenology and the distinctions made by Franz Brentano, Husserl, Merleau-Ponty, and others.[9]

The primary retention (in memory) signifies the immediate recognition or identification of a represented object. The secondary retention harks back to former experiences, actualized and represented as a whole, a recollection of contexts in the past (Husserl).[10] A further distinction is made by Husserl as the primary recollection not only includes the identification of objects and persons but also the emotional response attached to them: the secondary recollection, on the other hand, not only represents a former mental situation but also distinguishes the present state of mind as distinct from the former content actualized. The consciousness of this ambivalence is addressed as Phantasiebewußtsein (“phantasy of mind”).[11] Recollection in this wider sense is a sine qua non of creative reproduction, affecting the mind as a whole. This emergence in phenomenology may be traced back to Romanticism and even further, to processes in the mind as discussed by Locke and Hume. Later on, Coleridge in his Biographia Literaria (1817) dwells upon the distinction between Fancy and Imagination – the first defined as “Memory blended and modified by Choice”, the second as “Imagination dissolves, diffuses, dissipates, in order to recreate”. At this stage of the discussion we are dealing with the ordinary kind of memory, objects which are seen and experienced in representations but absent and therefore substituted by description. But here too it proves almost impossible to draw a clear line between an empirical object and experience detached from it – is there such a thing as an objective description?

The stronger a verbal or illusionistic description, the more we are inclined to yield to the suggestiveness, the conjuring up of the representation. The painter in former times was regarded as a ‘magician’, a mediator between reality conjured up and the observer led astray by way of mimesis.[13] Is there a psychological difference between a vivid description by Thomas Hardy, as cited in Wolf’s introduction, and a painting by Constable (fig. 1)? As an analysis of descriptions shows, in most, if not in all, cases as their means are verbal, pictorial and even auditive, they transcend the state of mere reproductions. The components of most descriptions are chosen from a reservoir of memories, decomposed and then restored in a new construction of a world, referred to by Coleridge as ‘Imagination’. Thus, even life-like descriptions show elements of construction rather than of pure re-presentation: explanation and interpretation have little to do with it: –they rather counteract description as such. If, with regard to literary description, Riffaterre therefore speaks of its primary function as being “to dictate an interpretation”, the formal aspect of ‘how’ something is described becomes adumbrated.[15]

The analogue case of practical representation in the visual arts (the mode of execution, form, color, expressiveness, etc.) obviously does not play any part in the cited definition of a ‘meaningful construct’. In my opinion, the formal ‘meaning’ on the level of a pre-iconographical description or expression, and experience related to it respectively, is just what a painting is all about. Van Gogh, for instance, makes us ‘see something’: e. g. the pungent yellow or the power of ultramarine in his stunning “Wheat Field with Crows” (1890). The pre-iconographical description and the practical experience related to it deal with formal aspects and aesthetic appreciation, in some cases it coincides with Panofsky’s “intrinsic meaning” or “symbolical value” of a work of art within the general cultural context.[16] With regard to still-life painting, for instance, the iconological question is not necessarily concerned with a specific meaning behind the motif in question but rather evaluating it as part of a genre within a general cultural context. Obviously, the strong demand for still-life paintings in 17th-century Dutch society provided the financial basis and means for a widespread specialization in this field of painting. The fundamental question as to whether a certain tradition of representation may lead to specific expectations, selective perception and widely accepted aesthetic norms, cannot be discussed here: it has been dealt with at length by Gombrich and others. Svetlana Alpers has written an influential book with the challenging title The Art of Describing (1983), dealing with description as the essential impetus and aspect of Dutch painting and culture in the 17th century.[17] Francis Bacon, Huygens, Kepler and Comenius were the champions of the empirical conquest of reality by way of the exact description of natural phenomena. The astronomer and the geographer, as portrayed by Vermeer in two famous paintings now in Paris and Frankfurt, by profession encompassed the field of natural sciences of the age: map-making was explicitly addressed as Descriptio mundi. The painter also held a prominent place in society as an expert in pictorial representation, here less concerned with mimetic description of things in nature and the surroundings, but rather as a depiction of the world seen from a cosmic angle above – an abstraction, but still the outcome of empirical investigations related to a highly complex cognitive frame. Jan Vermeer’s ‘The Painter in his Studio’ from 1665/1666 (fig. 2) may serve as a brilliant example of the thrust of Alpers’s argument. Description is not an end in itself, but nonetheless an indispensable means of communication, in the realm of art and aesthetics as well as with regard to cognition. In fact, Alpers and many scholars with her have paid attention to the spectacular map of the Netherlandish Provinces covering the wall in the background of our painting. With utmost precision Vermeer represents an actual map by Claes Jansz Visscher, of which one copy has been preserved in the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris.[19]

The rendering of the northern and southern Dutch Provinces hints at past history, the country itself being the outcome of a long historical process with intimations of a lost past and the potential glory of a future society. Clio, the personification of History, stands between the painter and the map, which shows the art of mimetic description in its most prestigious form but, at the same time, exemplifies a highly complex abstraction. In fact, the word Descriptio on the upper border of the map denotes a geographical representation of the world, ending up in a conceptual kind of depiction. Many artists were certainly involved in the investigative conquest of the visual world with all its scientific, commercial, and political implications. So in fact we are confronted with an adequate realization of a cognitive scientific frame. As described by Cesare Ripa in his Iconologia 1604, Nr. 346, the woman with the attributes of laurel, a trumpet and a book has to be understood as an allegorical representation of history, i. e. Clio, but this interpretation is weakened in our case by her strong physical presence, the allegory brought back to life by acute observation and a phenomenal execution.[20] Painting itself, the conjuring make believe, may be interpreted as a self-referential homage to the actual execution of the miraculous painting – a reconstruction of the intimate world of the studio, reflecting the everyday life of the busy painter, who, himself a part of the setting, is depicting his model’s laurel on the canvas and thus appears both as master and subject matter of the actual painting. Light becomes transformed into color, defining the objects and closing the gap between reality and the réaliser on the canvas, enhancing the visual quality of experience, leaving the spectator astounded by the strangeness of an interior at first glance classified as familiar. Description, as practiced by Vermeer, is not a mirror of the visible surrounding, but of the mind of the artist at work. This complex subject touches the core of artistic creativity: representing and transforming the world vu à travers un tempérament. The true subject of the painting – referring to cognition as a frame – is here located in the realm of otherness, reflecting the consciousness of a mind. The spectator stands at the threshold of a mental room which he perceives but will never enter. On the lateral borders of the map in the background of Vermeer’s painting we see a series of Dutch cities represented within the frames of the cartouches – actualizing the tradition of topographical description, which in Holland became a popular genre of painting itself, triggering a different cognitive frame.[21] The depiction of authentic cityscapes reached its climax with Vermeer’s “View of Delft” (Mauritshuis, Den Haag, fig. 3). The distinction between the accurate topographical description on the verge of scientific documentation, making use of the camera obscura and other devices responding to demands of a cognitive kind, and the abstract description of the map on the other hand, is obviously the outcome of a difference in function and social expectations, the cognitive frame shifting from one position to another. Vermeer had no problem siding with both.

The veduta in the eighteenth century can be gauged either way. Canaletto was held in high esteem, not only as an outstanding painter, but perhaps, and even more so, by the English gentry whose castles and the prestigious sites of their estates he depicted.[22] The commissioners certainly focused primarily on the accuracy of the depiction, and it took the genius of Constable to escape from the straight-jacket of this demand. Vermeer is only one of many painters reflecting upon description and the vital role of mimesis in the process of artistic realization. The wish to conjure up by means of a perfect illusion has been a constant theme in literature and ekphrasis since antiquity as recorded by Pygmalion’s dream, the utopian quality notwithstanding. An interesting painting by Magritte has come down to us, showing the artist depicting his model, representing her as a real person in space, liberated from the canvas she would normally merge with (fig. 4). The paradoxical nature of miraculous fiction is commented upon in the title: “Attempting the Impossible”. So far, I have dwelt upon some aspects of the iconic manner of description, wavering between the representation of things, absent and unseen, and the encounter with the world as reflected in the artefact. The examples chosen make it clear that even description and identification of simple objects in pictures tell us plenty about the general conditions of the ages, promoting the choice of motifs and the mode of expression. Moreover, the micro-genres cannot be separated from the general frame, which differs in pictorial arts from the cognitive macro-mode aimed at by verbal description and communication. I will here discuss the arguments put forward by Wolf in his introductory statement on “descriptions in the pictorial medium (painting)”.

The “typical class of signs”, at first envisaged, concerns the simple identification of “objects as static and spatial”. According to Wolf, a pictorial medium such as painting appears to have a very high descriptive potential, whereas the experience of its objects “requires only a relatively low degree of the recipients’ share […], since it permits the beholder to experience these objects in a way that is much closer to real-life perception than is the case, e. g., in written literature”. While Wolf focuses on a comparison between pictorial and verbal media, one must emphasize that apart from the comparative focus it would be a simplification to relate painting only to perception. In fact, such a simplification would adumbrate the complexity of the matter from a neurological point of view and, moreover, would not do justice to the psychological processes involved in mimetic representations and their mental reproduction on the part of the beholder. When hearing the sentence, ‘the horse is rearing’, as well as when looking at a drawing that shows a rearing horse, the brain of the recipient is triggered and his mind starts reproducing the event hinted at and the circumstances related to it. The word is not moving, nor is the depiction, but they are experienced as dynamic triggers, suggesting movement. The function of description, be it in words or in an image, is referential. Confusing a depicted object, illusionistic and spatial as it may appear, with reality is less probable, ‘impossible’ as Magritte asserted. I agree with Wolf that the amount of information stored by the depiction of a tree, in literature would require a never-ending, quite tiring ekphrasis – the simultaneity of iconic representation can conjure up an image which looks as diversified and rich as phenomena in nature (see fig. 5). But the process of making and matching (Gombrich) is regulated by norms and techniques related to the medium alone, the outcome of a longue durée and personal skill[25] The readiness of the spectator to respond to lines and dots, to ‘read’ these codes as descriptions and references to real objects, is astonishing indeed, and bears witness to the brain’s capacity for a high degree of abstraction. The ‘beholder’s share’, consciously or not, is always operating at this level. The dynamics of perception and their visual counterparts have been scrutinized for a long time, especially by Arnheim with regard to the visual arts, and mental projection itself has been reflected upon even long before. The ‘blottings’ by Alexander Cozens may serve as an example (fig. 6). Wolf has formulated the provocative question of whether ‘there are any pictures at all that are not descriptive’. Of course, all mimetic pictures are descriptive in a simple way, (e. g., on a low-level range of cognition), notwithstanding the fact that they consist of abstract, codified microsigns, put together in order to represent a certain motif. The pull of illusion indeed has proved to be strong enough to serve as a common denominator in the visual arts for about 800 years. Kandinsky stands at the end of this development, and his own artistic career bears witness to the struggle for liberation while eliminating mimesis. Yet in “Composition IV” from 1911, referred to by Wolf as an example of abstraction, there are still traces of mountains, towers (the ‘Kremlin’), riders, horses, battles, couples – lines and clusters of color, intimating a world pervaded by a ‘sounding cosmos’, standing at the brink of autonomy and self-referentiality – lines, colors and volumes, indexical traces of emotional response (fig. 7)[27]. Modern art is directed towards the world within, an emerging structure and harmony hitherto unseen and unheard of, coming into being: a revelation born out of the artist’s mind.[28] Less of a description, it is true, but rather a divination of a spiritual kind, as stated by Kandinsky himself in his book Über das Geistige in der Kunst from 1911.[29] Also the pittura metafisica aimed at the Great Spiritual ‘sub metaphoris corporalium’.

Even if there is such a thing as ‘abstract art’, let us consider Mondrian as another representative, description does not completely disappear there either, being directed towards structure and energetic color fields, which, according to the artist, represent underlying principles in nature and the cosmos by way of analogy. The knowledge which arises in descriptions of abstract painting is not less complex as in the case of mimetic art. We may compare Jackson Pollock’s ‘gestural painting’ with Barnett Newman’s “Vir heroicus Sublimis” (1958/1959), which cannot be defined by a one-way reference to well-known motifs and concepts, but rather as a deictic (demonstrative) approximation toward expression, reflecting the state of the artist’s mind.[30] Boehm has discussed the convergence of processual abstract art and ekphrasis with regard to the ‘deictic’ aspect, making the beholder see what has been brought to light. The Austrian painter Wolfgang Hollegha, promoted by Clement Greenberg in the late 1950s as one of the shooting stars, has developed a personal processual method of painting ever since: starting from an everyday object represented by swift explosive pencil drawings as an analogue movement characteristic of the motif, a spark setting imagination aflame. A gradual process of painting now ensues: splashes of pigments dripped and shed on the vast canvas on the floor, diluted, washed and blurred. Pollocks’s method of “drip painting” is now expanded to encompass sparkling color fields, interacting and merging and contrasting with each other during the process of realization into ever higher strata of abstraction (fig. 8).[32]

Depiction is here materialized as equivalent to imagination and the accompanying state of mind, reflecting nature as an echo from within. Painting triggers the active response of the subject, partaking in the dynamic, generative forces of nature, brought into being by the artefact. Hollegha explicitly takes side with the standpoint of Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, and Wittgenstein, rejecting the claim of heuristic objectivity and defending emotional response and the necessity of ‘being engaged’ in the visual world. The implication of subjectivity has been discussed by Charles Taylor with regard to the philosophers mentioned.[33] As for the painting of Wolfgang Hollegha, what at first sight seems to be a pure abstraction, always stems from an object observed. The gradual creative process of painting is guided by self-referential inner forces of necessity. Description at the end strives to visualize the inner state of the mind, turning the ongoing “morphology of feeling”, as Susanne K. Langer would have put it, into dynamic forms and orchestrated colors. The outcome may be characterized as a visual equivalent of the “morphology of feeling”, an emotional response. Wolf rightly speaks of a minimum of representationality required to evoke illusion and narrativity in visual art.[35] Giotto’s fresco of the “Flight into Egypt” in the Scrovegni Chapel in Padua (about 1305 A.D.), is referred to as an example of a “schematic, low-degree landscape description” (fig 9). It is true, mountain forests were certainly “not among the main interests of [the] painter”. But on the other hand, an application of our standards of illusion may prove fallacious. As spectators we have the possibility and ability to ‘adjust our mental set’, as Gombrich puts it. Compared to fresco-painting in the late thirteenth century, Giotto certainly embarked on an illusionistic adventure undreamt of before. At the same time, description as a means of illusion was never pushed beyond a certain point by the painter: it remained rather balanced and even reduced, due to other artistic considerations. Mother and infant, riding on the donkey, occupy the center of the square, according to Arnheim, the least dynamic position of an object on a plane, intimating stability and certainty.[36] The group is further stabilized by the mountain peak looming in the background. At the same time, Giotto had to represent a passing moment – the donkey and the other protagonists ‘move’ across the picture plane from left to right. The position of the lines and the torsion of the bodies, not to speak of the foreshortened angel showing the way, certainly strengthen this effect. Later on Wolf concedes “a particularly large share of the recipients’ imaginary activity” while experiencing movement in bodies.[37] The effect of transitoriness is further enhanced by the depiction of the companion just entering the picture on the left, or the contour of Joseph overlapped by the framing border on the right. The impression of depth in space is evoked by the smaller and darker mountain to the left. The dominant sweeping contours of the mountains descending diagonally from left to right enhance the forward pull of the group, especially accentuated by the right arm of Joseph who is about to vanish out of sight.[38] The position of the tree-trunks, stabilizing verticals or slight diagonals, also indicates both stasis and movement. A rising diagonal from left to right – the arm of the companion, the bridle and the neck of the donkey, culminating in Joseph’s head and shoulders – serves as a counterpoint, indicating the direction of the protagonists. All of this is effectuated within the square of the fresco, which never gives up its specific character being an iconic structure restricted to a plane. The indexical hints are incorporated into a calculated, apparently simple order which turns out to be highly complex. We are confronted with a deictic frame of formal organization, with an icon corresponding, by way of analogy, to the true subject matter: “The Flight to Egypt”, transitory, yet fixed. For these reasons I cannot see why paintings, as asserted by Wolf, should have “obvious limitations in realizing […] the temporal frame of representation par excellence, namely narratives”. Although restricted to the representation of single events and specific objects, references to the past or to the future within a narration are abundant also in the visual arts. Temporality, in fact, is a constitutive part of representation, mimetic and expressive, as well as of perception. The depiction of a story told in visual art may be called intermedial, but most of the stories themselves are related, in their turn, to conceptual frames of a more general kind. Bialostocki talks about general human topics as iconographical ‘framing themes’ (Rahmenthemen).[40] As for religious motifs and biblical texts, these meta-frames serve as a sine qua non of any story told or represented, and the description or representation itself is, in the end, also related to the exegesis, or, in the profane context, to an interpretation and, quite frequently, an implicit moral lesson. Detailed information on single objects and constellations refers to concepts and events represented by visual objects, figures, signs and symbols. Description, thus, is not only restricted to the presentation and identification of the motifs enumerated. They serve as vehicles, i. e. references to a concept of a more general kind. Wolf´s analysis of Johann Heinrich Wüest’s “Rhône Glacier when looking north-east” from 1772/1773 serves as a good example (fig 10).[41] Minute figures in the foreground reflect different attitudes and reactions in the observer himself. As he is caught by the overwhelming dimensions and the force of the scenery, the painting mediates awe, enjoyment of the spectacle, and the actual presence of the Sublime by the panorama represented. The tiny figures in the foreground are shown as if reacting to Nature. The referent, in their case, is not located in the landscape, but rather in the state of the beholder’s mind, revealed by gestures and the like. Whereas Edmund Burke stressed the physical conditioning of fear and terror triggered by the overwhelming panorama, Wüest seems to take sides with Diderot and Kant here, relegating the Sublime to the realm of psychology, e. g. self-consciousness.[42] Even in this landscape painting, which is not primarily narrative, the motif itself and the minute figures represented suffice to draw attention to a conceptual frame reflecting a specific aesthetic experience. The analysis of Giotto’s “Flight into Egypt” dealt with the formal structure as related to the represented narrative and motion. The second layer of Panofsky’s iconology not only concerns the content of ‘images, stories and allegories’, but also the question of how a picture can refer to an action unfolding in time? Description here still serves as a reference to a conceptual frame. During some periods of cultural history there was a growing tendency to imbue single objects with a “symbolical meaning” – the locus classicus of Thomas Aquinas was deliberately chosen as the title of this paper: spiritualia sub metaphoris corporalium (Summa Theologica I, qu. I art. 9, c).[43] The problem of ‘disguised symbolism’ (Panofsky), emerging in early Netherlandish painting, arises from the fact that the presumed ‘symbolical’ meaning, and consequently the referential function of objects minutely depicted and packed into a contemporary interior, is hard to distinguish. Iconographical tradition may help to clarify the significance.[44]

The Mérode Altarpiece by Robert Campin, about 1425 (fig. 11) here serves as an example: the pot with the lilies on the table refers to the chastity of the virgin, as do the laver and basin as substitutes for the ‘fountain of gardens’ and the ‘well of living waters’. The lions in the armrest of the bench refer to the Throne of Solomon (I. Kings x, 18 ff.), a simile of the Madonna as Sedes Sapientiae. The candle on the table probably signifies Christ: Christus […] est candela accensa (Speculum Humanae Salvationis, chapter 10), though the extinction, according to Panofsky, could also refer to the notion of St. Bridget that the mother of the Lord by the radiance of Light Divine became “reduced to nothingness”.[45]

In the Lucca-Madonna by Jan van Eyck (Städelsches Kunstinstitut, Frankfurt) but ten years later, we are confronted with the same constellation, now in a more restricted but still illusionistic representation of an interior. The motif of the Madonna lactans is now combined with the illuminated glass carafe in the niche, referring to the vision of St. Bridget, recapitulated by the Nativity Hymn:

    As the sunbeam through the

    glass passeth but not breaketh,

    So the Virgin, as she was,

    Virgin still remaineth.[46]

The referent (e. g. the cognitive frame), made visible by description, elucidates the meaning of the scenery as a whole: the purity of the Virgin.

Turning once more to the Mérode altarpiece, which represents the crucial event of the Annunciation, we are certainly confronted with a narrative subject. The extensive research devoted to this painting has progressed ever since Schapiro and Panofsky.[47] Which moment of the event was chosen? Has the angel already announced the message to the Virgin still reading in her breviary? The tiny infant carrying the cross, just intruding through the circular window to the left, was normally accompanied by the dove of the Holy Ghost. Has he already reached his goal? The sumptuous codex on the table was identified by Châtelet as the Exposition by Ludolph of Saxony on The Life of the Virgin.[48] Ludolph, in another text, describes the descent of the Holy Ghost on the occasion of the Pentecost in terms of a blowing wind. According to Bonaventura in his Lignum vitae (c. 1250), the Holy Ghost “came over her like a divine fire, inflaming her mind and sanctifying the flesh with the most perfect purity. Then the virtue of the most High was infused into her in order that she might be able to sustain such ardor.”[49] We can thus conclude that the divine wind, or fire, has already passed, extinguishing the candle on the table in doing so.

Patrik Reuterswärd drew attention to another indication of the occurrence: the parchment folios of the codex (also dealing with the subject) seem to have been curled up as if having been exposed to a great heat.[50] Thus the previous stages of the narrative become indicated, and the incarnation itself is just about to take place. Needless to say, the verbal communication of a certain concept is more precise than depictions of objects and symbols in the visual arts. Even the symbolic meaning may cause uncertainty and debate there, the deictic function sometimes being more the outcome of an interpretation than a simple representation of an undisputed content with an intrinsic meaning. The semantic analysis of iconographic symbols has dealt with the uncertainties here involved. It is not the description of an object, a narrative or an abstract concept that is at stake here but rather the way a content or supposed meaning is transformed to the beholder. Semantic studies dealing with these problems emerged in the 1950s and the philosopher Göran Hermerén, has summed up this development.[51]

Distinction is made between conventional symbols based on rational agreement and natural symbols referring to a referent by way of a similarity or a causal relationship based on form or content. Semi-conventional symbols, moreover, may refer to abstract concepts based on a general agreement, or by way of a similarity between the object represented and an assumed significance familiar to the beholder.

Iconographic symbols, according to Hermerén, merge with pictures or objects referring to an intrinsic meaning or an implicit concept, as is the case in a pragmatic illustration.[52] Allusion effectuated by an iconographic symbol makes the beholder think of a certain content which is not directly represented. Three more referential types of symbols ensue: the opinion brought forward by the artist; the hidden symbol, the meaning of which is only distinguishable within a wider context; and allegories and respectively symbols. Allegories exemplify general concepts through figures or narratives: they always refer to a cognitive frame of abstract concepts and ideas. The genesis of a symbol, on the other hand, emerges from the object itself, the symbolic quality of which has been generally acknowledged and also corroborated by aesthetic experience. Tradition and convention with roots in Romanticism play a decisive role here. Subsequently Hermerén deals with the iconological interpretation of art, its content in relation to the prevailing cultural situation, aiming at a comprehensive Weltanschauung. This method was developed in cultural history and sociology by Karl Mannheim and applied to the history of art by Panofsky and others. The third strata of “an intrinsic meaning or content, constituting the world of symbolical values”, remains accessible only by intuition born out the scholar’s acquaintance with the cultural situation as represented by the humanities, literature and the arts and the prevailing life style and Weltanschauung of the historical period in quest.[53] A congruence between a work of art and the intrinsic meaning is hypothetically distinguished as an analogue structure or an identical Gestalt as a whole, discerned by intuition as the outcome of the underlying “spirit of the age”. The latter also encompasses the relation between the artefact, its originator, the impact on the beholder, the cultural context and tradition, and hence also the adhering description. The sociological field and the related interactions are also decisive factors in the interpretation of visual phenomena as the outcome of the hidden “third strata” of meaning. The symbolical interpretation and iconological description of an artwork can only, in the end, be corroborated by the scholar’s intuition and feeling. Notwithstanding the subjective flaws in the methods adhering to the general history of ideas, they cannot invalidate the higher aspiration of iconology as a constitutive part of cultural tradition. In 1877 the physicist Ludwig Boltzmann published a major work on thermodynamics, using statistics as a means of physical calculation. Many problems in physics still remain unsolved and even mysterious, as for instance phenomena in quantum mechanics, but in consequence the calculation of probabilities has become an indispensable method in cognitive sciences ever since in solving seemingly hopeless cases. This also goes for prognostics in sociology, economy, and politics. As we have seen, the iconologist also operates in a similar way in the field of cultural history. The description of a work of art and the interpretation applied may refer to a hypothetical cognitive frame or an unfathomable intrinsic meaning. Although the reference cannot attain certainty, the conclusions drawn by the scholar can claim a high grade of probability.

The cognitive limitations of narration in the visual arts are compensated by a wide range of references, located in the past or in the future. Pictorial narrativity is endowed with a complexity which is different but as diversified as in verbal narratives. An apparently ‘realistic scene’ and single motifs are saturated with meaning, though we can never be sure to grasp them all, nor can we speak of the ‘one and only’ intention behind them. Pictorial representations, ambiguous as they may be with regard to narrativity and descriptivity, are, by their own means, no less suggestive and far-reaching than their verbal counterparts. Description as such is therefore – as well as narration – certainly a transmedial mode of representation, not restricted to verbal texts, or pictures for that matter.

Echoes of Egypt in 12th-century Bologna and 13th-century Rome

In the Middle Ages, authentic ancient Egyptian artifacts emerged from the remains of former temples of Isis in places like Bologna and Rome, where they inspired Romanesque sculptors.  This paper examines the specific examples of the 12th-century Benedictine cloister of Santo Stefano in Bologna and the 13th-century Benedictine cloister of San Giovanni in Laterano, the latter created and signed by a father-and-son team from the Vassalletto dynasty of Roman marble workers. The Vassalletto family carved Egyptian-style sphinxes and lions in several places in the Papal State; here they are placed in connection with a particular family, the Conti di Segni, who owned property near three ancient Roman temples of Isis and Serapis: the Isaeum Campense, the temple of Serapis on the Quirinal, and the Esquiline Sanctuary of Isis and Serapis. A revived interest in ancient Egypt is well documented for 15th-century Italy, from the recovery and study of texts like the Corpus Hermeticum and the Hieroglyphica of Horapollo to the fascination with ancient Egyptian artifacts large and small, especially those preserved in Rome.[1] Yet the distinctive arts of Egypt had already captured the imaginations of some medieval Italian artists and their patrons in 12th-century Bologna and the 13th-century Papal State, and probably with some awareness that they were dealing specifically with Egyptian works. Although Rome has always boasted a higher concentration of Egyptian artifacts than any other European city, Egyptian objects were already being imported to Italy in Etruscan times.[2]  As the ties between Rome and Egypt tightened in the first century BCE, culminating with the annexation of Egypt after the Battle of Actium in 31 BCE, the volume of this trade continued to increase, leaving a scattering of Egyptian objects throughout the Italian peninsula. An ancient statue of the Nile has stood in above ground in Naples for most of its history, lending its name to one of the districts of the city, the Seggio di Nilo.[3] Temples to Isis and Serapis were erected in Pompeii, Beneventum, and Bologna as well as Rome. According to his 12th-century Vita, St. Petronius, the patron saint of Bologna, built a church over the city’s temple of Isis in the 5th-century, modeling its architecture on the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem.[5] Subsequent construction in what became an extensive Benedictine monastic complex has made this claim impossible to verify archaeologically. However, the 12th-century loggia that connects the monastery’s various churches and chapels, the so-called “Cortile di Pilato”, features columns with capitals evidently inspired by Egyptian art. These include a papyrus capital, a lotus capital, the image of a seated scribe (Fig. 1), the figures of Jupiter Ammon with his ram’s horns and Hathor with her cow ears as well as a grotesque-looking medieval version of Bes (Fig. 2).

Both the courtyard and the neighboring cloister were probably built shortly after the discovery of the relics of St. Petronius (1143) within the round church he is said to have founded, the Basilica of the Holy Sepulcher.  Some of the cloister’s column capitals show sinners being punished (a man with a huge rock on his back, a man with his head turned around on his shoulders); it seems possible that the Egyptian figures in the Cortile di Pilato should also be seen as prisoners of the sacred architecture that holds them in place. Vitruvius and his De Architectura were well known in the Middle Ages (and certainly in a university town like Bologna), with the tale of the Caryatids, punished for their treachery by having their features commemorated in stone statues that took the place of columns on a portico (Vitruvius 1.1.5). Egyptian artifacts from the ancient temple of Isis must have emerged during construction of the courtyard and cloister in the 12th century, if not before; the complex sustained severe damage in the Hungarian invasions of Bologna in the 10th century, and had already been remodeled extensively in the 11th. In any event, the 12th-century report that St. Petronius had founded his church of the Holy Sepulcher on the site of an ancient temple of Isis seems to have been founded on concrete archaeological evidence as well as local legend.  The ancient statues themselves probably disappeared long ago, although the Museo Civico of Bologna does preserve a number of ancient Egyptian artifacts from the collection of the University, one of the oldest such institutions in Europe.[6]

The idea that these ancient deities might be serving out a perpetual sentence as bearers of Christian architecture will recur when we turn to a set of Egyptian-inspired figures from 13th-century Rome. Again the context is a Benedictine monastery that arose near an ancient temple of Isis. Among a large and fierce population of protective sculpted lions, the glorious 13th-century cloister of San Giovanni in Laterano in Rome (Fig. 3) also presents the images of two Egyptian sphinxes and a house cat. These crouching sphinxes, facing inward, guard the cloister’s central access to the enclosed garden with its 9th-century wellhead, while pairs of lions watch over the other two entrances. The garden is thus singled out as a hortus conclusus, a sacred space within the cloister of Sts. John the Baptist and John the Evangelist, the Benedictine monastery attached to the Lateran Basilica from the 9th century onward.[7]

The sphinxes, like the crouching lions at the other entrances, are extremely worn.  Both wear the linen nemes headdress that distinguished portraits of pharaoh in ancient Egypt, and must, therefore, derive from some Egyptian source in Rome. The sphinx to the left of the entrance (Fig. 4) sports a carefully curled Classical beard and the remnants of what seems to have been an impressive handlebar moustache.

His counterpart on the opposite side (Fig. 5) is beardless and cheerful, with the remnants of a huge smile and prominent laugh lines radiating outward from the corner of each sculpted eye.  Their crouching bodies are neither explicitly male nor female. Their nemes-headdresses are distinctive but not identical.

The house cat (Fig. 6) appears amid a range of lions carved along the cloister’s elaborate white marble frieze.

The artists involved in creating this beautiful cloister are known from an inscription carved into one of its pilasters: two generations of the Vassalletto family, a dynasty of marble workers from Rome. Surprisingly for a medieval artisan, the inscription is in Latin verse:

    Nobilis et doctus hac / Vassallectus in arte / cum patre cepit opus/ quod solus perficit ipse.

Vassalletto, unlike most artists of his era, is evidently an educated man, who describes himself as “nobilis et doctus”, only to qualify his nobility and learning, somewhat, by the specification “hac in arte”– proving that he is also skilled in verbal rhetoric. “Noblis” may simply mean that he qualifies for the title “Magister”. As for his mastery “hac in arte”, the fact that he is completing an ornamental cloister for the supreme pontiff in the mother church of Christendom provides testimony enough. The Vassalletto dynasty can be traced over four generations of fathers and sons from the mid-12th to the mid-13th century: Vassalletto I, Pietro Vassalletto, Vassalletto II, and Nicola Vassalletto. Vassalletto the founding father carved a crouching column-bearing lion for the basilica of Santissimi Apostoli. The sculpture is poorly preserved today, but signed BASSALECTUS, a Latinized version of the family’s name.[8]

The father and son responsible for the Lateran cloister are generally thought to be Vassalletto’s son and grandson, Pietro Vassalletto and Vassalletto II.[9] Construction began on the project under Pope Innocent III, but continued under his successors Honorius III and Gregory IX, whose involvement is commemorated in the partially preserved mosaic inscription along the frieze, its large gold letters on cerulean blue (see Fig. 3) contrasting with the small inscribed signature of Vassalletto and his father.

Their presence of the sphinxes among two pairs of lions shows that they, too, served as guardians of the entry from the cloister into the central garden. There is no doubt that Vassalletto’s figures have been inspired by ancient Egyptian originals, both in their crouching posture and in the detailing of their nemes headdresses, which are similar to one another but by no means identical.  Yet both of them exhibit definite peculiarities. The closest parallels to the bearded sphinx, with his Egyptian headgear and Classical curls, come from portraits of the Emperor Caracalla in a nemes, although no statues of this kind survive in Rome itself, and no statues are preserved that show Caracalla as a sphinx.[10] Still, this emperor endowed a shrine to Isis on the Quirinal and possibly another on the Caelian.[11]

The right-hand sphinx is not just smiling, but positively laughing, the corners of his eyes crinkled with mirth. James Stevens Curl notes that:

    Egyptian and Egyptianizing lions and sphinxes surviving in Rome (mostly late works from Egypt or Roman versions of Egyptian originals) were used as exemplars by Cosmati artists, who emphasized the slight and mysterious smiles on the Antique versions, so that the 13th-century sphinxes (and sometimes lions as well) acquired wide smiles and wrinkles of laughter around the yes. Pairs of male and female sphinxes (as in the Lateran examples), are Revivalist rather than Echt-Egyptian [...][12]

An especially suggestive parallel to this merry sphinx comes from a worn Egyptian marble head with nemes of Roman Imperial date with what looks like a broad smile and inlaid eyes. It was found on the Via Labicana in 1875, and probably comes, therefore, from the large Isis temple in ancient Regio III, the Esquiline Hill. Unfortunately, it now lives in the storeroom of the extension of the Capitoline Museums at the Centrale Montemartini in Rome.[13]

The sculpted house cat on the Lateran cloister frieze also derives ultimately from an Egyptian original, for many Roman cats are descended from temple cats imported from Egypt to the Isaeum Campense, the Isis complex in the Campus Martius. One of the cats of Isis is commemorated in an ancient marble sculpture on the cornice of the present-day Palazzo Grazioli, and also gives her name to the Via della Gatta that runs alongside the palazzo.[14]

The Lateran cloister’s guardian sphinxes, with their Egyptian detailing, are by no means unique. Several other examples of crouching sphinxes with nemes-headdresses still survive, all from the 13th century, all preserved within the territory of the old Papal State, most of them connected with the Vassalletto family, and, as shall be argued here, connected with the baronial family that provided a series of popes in this period, the Conti di Segni. Because the circumstances of their making are so complex and the information about them is so sparse, the sphinxes continue to raise a host of unanswerable questions, beginning with the basic question: did anyone, sculptors, patrons, or scholars, know that these figures were specifically Egyptian, or specifically associated with Pharaoh? That medieval Roman sculptors were familiar with genuine Egyptian artifacts is evident both from the detailing of the Lateran sphinxes and from their crouched pose. Ever since late antiquity, Rome had been Europe’s version of Egypt, with monumental temples to Isis and Serapis in the Campus Martius, on the Quirinal, and on the Esquiline, 43 obelisks, and endless numbers of porphyry basins, granite columns, bathtubs, sculptures, table legs, paintings, furniture, miniature figurines and jewelry, not to mention the riches of Hadrian’s Villa near Tivoli.[15] Only a tiny fraction of that abundance survives to the present day.

Crouching sphinxes also appeared beneath Roman statues depicting the Nile as a classical river god, including the figure beneath Michelangelo’s staircase at the summit of the Campidoglio, who may have started life as a pediment sculpture for the Temple of Serapis on the Quirinal.[16]

Thirteenth century Roman sculptors had, therefore, a number of Egyptian models to choose from if they so desired. Furthermore, the 12th and 13th centuries were a period of active construction in Rome, including monumental porticoes and colonnades that once lined many of the main streets running through the city. The search for architectural materials to reuse, especially the ubiquitous stone columns, would have led to the discovery of ancient sculpture and other artifacts.

All three of the 13th-century popes connected with the construction of the Lateran Cloister came from Roman baronial families. Innocent III, the former Lothario dei Conti di Segni, was born in Anagni in the southern reaches of the papal state in 1160 or 1161, but studied in Rome and Paris before taking up a career in the Church. Elected in 1198, he is best known for calling the disastrous Fourth Crusade of 1204, extending official approval to Francis of Assisi and his followers in 1210, and calling the Fourth Lateran Council of 1215.[17] He died the following year. In 1228, his brother Riccardo erected the gigantic Torre dei Conti next to the Roman Forum, on land that bordered three major Egyptian sanctuaries in Rome: the Isaeum Campense, the Serapaeum, and the sanctuary of Isis and Serapis in Regio III.[18]

Normally the colossal ruins of the Serapeum have been associated with the Colonna family, whose property still engulfs the surviving remains.  One of the sphinxes now in the Capitoline Museum entered their collection by the 15th century, and the 16th-century cardinal Pompeo Colonna commissioned consciously Egyptian-themed decorations for a missal.[19]  However, we should probably look more closely at the connection between the Conti di Segni and these monuments to understand the Egyptian-inspired sphinxes of the Vassalletto family. Pope Honorius III, born Cencio Savelli in 1150, was a protégé of Innocent III. Elected in 1216, he continued his mentor’s interests by promoting the Fifth Crusade and encouraging the new Franciscan and Dominican orders. In hopes of encouraging his former pupil Frederick II of Germany to lead the Crusade, Honorius crowned him Holy Roman Emperor in Rome in 1220.[20] But Frederick lingered in Europe as several troops of Crusaders campaigned without success in Egypt.

The Pope’s efforts with the new mendicant orders of Christendom were more successful. Honorius approved the Dominican Order in 1216, and in 1219 invited Dominic himself to move to Rome and live in the convent of Santa Sabina. He approved the Franciscans in 1223, and died in Rome in 1227.

Gregory IX, the pope who finally finished the Lateran cloister, was related to Innocent III through his Conti di Segni mother.  His name at birth was Ugolino d’Anagni, the city where he was born in 1145.  A canon lawyer trained in Paris and Bologna, he approved the book of canon law called the New Compilation of Decretals in 1234, and canonized both Francis of Assisi and Dominic Guzmán. Unlike his predecessor, Honorius, he quarreled openly with Frederick II, and campaigned energetically against the Jews.[21]

The spiral mosaic column that serves as a base for the paschal candle at the Cathedral of Anagni, Gregory’s birthplace, is held up by two marble crouching sphinxes with nemes headdresses. The work is signed by Vassalletto (surely Vassalletto II).[22] Another sphinx with a nemes is walled into the entrance to the sacristy of the cathedral in nearby Ferentino.[23]

Yet another 13th-century sphinx with a nemes holds up a choir screen together with a lion in the Cathedral of Civita Castellana, a city that had a certain importance in the 13th century as a way station between Rome and Perugia, where the Curia frequently met. This work is signed by Drudo da Trivio, who also created the ciborium on the high altar of the cathedral in Anagni; the possible date is usually set around 1230, early in the reign of Gregory IX.[24] An inscription credits the decoration of the cathedral itself to a “Raniero”—if this were the powerful Cardinal Raniero Capocci, who had worked closely with Honorius III, the opulence of the church and its lion-and-sphinx parapet would find a plausible context. [25]

All of these sphinxes are carrying something: columns, walls, parapets. Like the Caryatids and Telamones of classical tradition, they have been put to work forever as a public display. In the case of the Caryatids, Vitruvius declares explicitly that these women from a treacherous city have been singled out for shame.  These 13th-century sphinxes by Roman masters appear in connection with a close-knit group of popes from Roman baronial families, all well-educated, all concerned with Rome’s primacy, Crusade, and the conquest of heresy.  As Erik Hornung has pointed out, by the 13th century Europe was full of pilgrims, travelers, and returning Crusaders who had passed to the Holy Land by way of Cairo and the Sinai.[26] This was certainly the case for Honorius III, under whose reign the battlefield for the Crusaders was an Egyptian battlefield at Damietta.[27] It is does not seem entirely far-fetched, then, to imagine 13th-century popes using Egyptian artifacts exactly as their pagan Roman predecessors had: to represent the triumph of Rome over every other culture—with one significant difference. Most of these sphinxes wear a broad smile. Perhaps, as the Gospel of Matthew declares (11:30), we are to believe that Christian service is an occasion for joy: “For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.”

It seems equally possible that a man as learned as Vassalletto might have had some inkling of what he was carving as he put the finishing touches on the Lateran Cloister, in the service of a learned pope whose mother may have grown up in the valley between the huge, ruined Temple of Serapis and the remnants of the Esquiline temple of Isis and Serapis. Furthermore, if the triumph is indeed that of Christian revelation, the captive Sphinx has every reason to be smiling with the revelation of enlightenment. Egypt, after all, was also the home of Christian monasticism.

A 13th-century sphinx from the Dominican convent of Santa Maria in Gradi in Viterbo bears the signature of another Roman master: Magister Paschalis Romanus, and the date of 1286.[28] Her face and hairstyle are definitely female, although her body resembles that of the Egyptian sphinxes carved by Vassalletto and Drudo.  Most significantly, however, she is a freestanding sculpture. Nothing, so far as we can tell, ever burdened her back.

For nearly three decades in the second half of the 13th century, the Curia resided in Viterbo, but the Popes had departed by the time she was made. Honorius IV, the pope who reigned when this sphinx was created, was elected in Perugia but crowned in Rome.[29] During his reign he granted many favors to the two new mendicant orders, the Franciscans and the Dominicans, and perhaps this sphinx, too, has some connection with the papacy through his favors to the Order of Preachers.

It seems likely that Master Paschal saw the same Egyptian sphinxes in Rome as his colleagues from the Vassalletto family, but we can never be entirely sure. In 2012, officers of the Italian Guardia di Finanza raided a property in Viterbo and there, under wraps, was a well-preserved Egyptian sphinx, illegally excavated from an ancient site near the village of Monterosi, halfway between Viterbo and Rome.[30] Whether it adorned an Etruscan tomb or a Roman shrine, its context has been lost. Even so, the discovery stands as a reminder that the Egyptian artifacts in Italy were more widespread and more various than we know.

Did the Bolognese artisans know that they were reproducing Egyptian art? Did Vassalletto, Drudo of Trevi, and Master Paschal the Roman know? In the case of Santo Stefano, the sculptors are certainly referring to a tradition, and surely to artifacts, associated with the very spot on which they worked.  Vassalletto and Drudo, like their patrons, show at least familiarity with the characteristic poses and headgear of Egyptian sculptures in Rome, and Master Paschal, as a Roman, presumably had the same opportunities.  The specific patrons and specific contexts of these works tends to suggest that they share a definite, rather than a generic meaning, in which the papacy, Egypt, and the Crusades might seem to play a likely role.


Even in Scandinavia, the lion is the most common predator in Romanesque church decoration. It is found in sculpture and mural paintings as well as in holy books, on church textiles and metalwork. This article discusses the symbolic meaning of all these lions and addresses the question of whether they can be attributed meaning or if they are to be considered simple decoration.

Based on the Bible, the Bestiaries and a small selection of other written sources, the literary meaning of the lion in medieval culture is investigated. A wide spectrum of qualities is disclosed. Most are positive or even God-like, but there are also sources referring to the lion as a symbol of evil. This seemingly double character has been used as an argument against ascribing meaning to the image of the lion when outside an unambiguous context. The basis for all interpretations is the natural characteristics of the lion: strength, courage, stately appearance and noble character. From these, as well as some mythic characteristics a wide variety of roles for the lion have developed. 12 distinct roles can be clearly identified from the written sources and the Romanesque pictorial tradition. Nine of them are undoubtedly positive from a Christian point of view, while two are ambiguous and only the satanic lions are clearly negative.

The potential meaning of the 18 lions or lion-like sculptures at Værnes church (1120-1160) is discussed. They are all placed close to external portals or other openings or at the end of roof beams in the interior. These all belong to the liminal zones of the church building. This gives them a general role as guardian lions, even if some of them also play other roles or lack attributes which makes them easy to interpret individually.

Even if distinct roles can be identified, many of the sculpted or painted lions represent several roles at the same time. Some lions are also placed in ornamental contexts where there is good reason to argue that their main purpose is decorative. That does not mean that these lions did not also convey meaning to the medieval recipient. The idea of an unambiguous answer to the riddle of traditional iconography is just too narrow to fathom the many aspects of the lion. This article argues that even when aggressive, the lion is normally in the service of God, punishing the sinner. This as well as the constancy of the lion as symbol of strength, speaks for a general significance of the lion for the medieval viewer.

The lion is one of the most common figurative motifs in Romanesque religious art. Its image is reproduced in all materials: stone, wood, brass, paint and books. The context also vary greatly, the lion is found in all parts of the church building, on different liturgical objects, as well as in manuscripts from the full page to the margins. An influential monument as Lund cathedral has a total of more than 80 Romanesque lions in stone.[1] In Scandinavia the lion is strongly associated with the Christian culture that took hold from the 10th century on. Even if lion-like figures are found in early Scandinavian art, it is one of the motifs that gained more widespread use with the new cult.[2] Not only did it dominate religious art, the lion also found its way into the coats of arms of the royal families of Norway, Denmark and Sweden. The textual interpretations of the lion spans from a picture of Christ to the Devil himself. This rather complex situation has made many researchers reluctant to ascribe iconographic meaning to the lion. The argument is that the motif is too diverse to interpret and it is thus reduced to decoration. This article will present the many facets of the lion and single out the common denominators to look for consistent meaning in the many images. The main argument is that the lion has some constant qualities which in most cases make it relevant to discuss its meaning.

As a short article does not allow for the number of illustrations necessary to allow the pictorial material to form its backbone, the choice has been to base the argument mainly on the written sources and reduce the images to illustrations, even though the point of departure for the article is indeed the images. All the pictorial traditions that are discussed in this paper are found in Scandinavian Romanesque art, but some of the illustrations are later or from other countries.[3] In some cases this is for practical reasons, in other cases illustrations accompanied by instructive texts are chosen to link the images to the written sources.

When the lion motif came to Scandinavia where no physical lions were known, it was embedded with meaning.[4] To probe beneath all these different and sometimes apparently conflicting meanings, it is necessary to go to the Bible and the Bestiaries, which are the two most relevant written sources on the aspects of the lion in theological thinking. The next step will be to go through the different roles the lion plays in medieval Christian art, singling out 12 distinct functions. Finally, the question of meaning versus decoration will be discussed, using the church of Værnes, Nord Trøndelag as a case study.
Traditionally art historical research has been dominated by the iconographical practice of matching motifs with written sources. This is one of the reasons that the diverse Romanesque figural art has to a great degree been written off as decorative, not carrying meaning.

Those who have approached the lion to look for a basis of interpretation have often started off with the Bestiary, a medieval literary tradition based on a continuity from Antiquity. Many Bestiaries were illuminated and thus constitute a direct link between word and picture. The Bestiary has its own research history, with several authors looking for imprints in the pictorial arts, beyond the illuminations.[5]

To the degree older researchers like the French art historian Émile Mâle (1862-1954) worked with non-narrative motifs, it was with the aim to find a textual basis for interpretation. The comprehensive articles on the lion in the Encyclopedia on Nordic Medieval Cultural History discuss the lion as a motif in writing and art in the iconographic tradition.[6] Its many roles are highlighted and in the chapter on iconography Martin Blindheim (1916-2009) presents the iconographical types, touches upon a presumed apotropaic function only to conclude: “In the great majority of cases however, the lion is part of a common European ornamental treasure wherever it is placed; on portals, benches, boxes, knife sheaths or in illuminated manuscripts etc.”.

The art historian Michael Camille (1958-2002) changed the focus of research to the margins, to investigate the interplay between marginal and central motifs. Such a wider contextual approach has proven fruitful and has provided a basis for reading non-literary motifs as well. This approach opens up for a reading beyond the traditional iconography, without discarding the results of iconography.

This study argues for an open reading as discussed by Elisabeth Sears.[7] This involves a close visual analysis, informed by a knowledge of the special historical context with the aim of gaining an understanding of the possible intentions and contemporary interpretations of the object. However, the method of the article is rather to present representative examples of the different motifs and establish them as typos on the basis of a pictorial tradition, supported with literary evidence where possible. The intention is to inspire use of these categories as help to uncover the possible meanings of the thousands of Romanesque lions still to be encountered in the most unexpected places. A brief case study of the lions in Værnes church is an attempt to show how this approach can be put to use. From the introduction, it would seem obvious that this article will argue for the lion motif in general, carrying a meaning far beyond the merely decorative. The aim is to present the lion as a prime example of a many faceted motif where several interpretations often will be relevant.

The roots of lion as a symbol can be traced back to the Old Testament and the other ancient civilizations of the Eastern Mediterranean. The remote and ancient roots of the motif have been used as an argument for the lion as a pictorial convention that was imported to Christian culture as pure form borrowed from Oriental art. Émile Mâle argued that the lion in Romanesque church decoration was an ornamental loan: “Our sculptors were not always concerned with teaching; most of the time they thought only to decorate.”[8] He continues to argue that many of the animal motifs, and prominent among them most lions, were borrowed from Eastern textile art, which was well known in medieval Europe. For instance, the pair of lions flanking a tree denotes the tree of life or the tree of truth: not Biblical trees but the ancient myths of the Chaldean culture.[9] In Mâle’s opinion those motifs have travelled as empty forms and were adopted by the medieval artists when they saw the fantastic and inspiring textiles that were imported in particularly large numbers after the crusades.

Mâle does not seem to have considered whether meaning traveled along with the motifs. The continuity of the myths of the trees of truth and life are examples that are very close at hand. The question is whether the dichotomy between meaning or decoration is relevant. Of course decoration was intended but that does not exclude that the motifs were charged with meaning at the same time.

The Cistercian abbot and reformer Bernhard of Clairvaux (1090-1153) is an unavoidable source in this argument, as he is one of few influential medieval writers who addresses the question of church decoration directly. Here, an often quoted, passage from his Apology (1125), is presented in extentio, as the whole text gives some important nuances to his argument:

Finally, what good are such things to poor men, to monks, to spiritual men? Perhaps the poet’s question could be answered with words from the prophet: “Lord, I have loved the beauty of your house, and the place where your glory dwells” (Ps. 26:8). I agree. Let us allow this to be done in churches because, even if it is harmful to the vain and greedy, it is not such to the simple and devout. But in cloisters, where the brothers are reading, what is the point of this ridiculous monstrosity, this shapely misshapenness, this misshapen shapeliness? What is the point of those unclean apes, fierce lions, monstrous centaurs, half-men, striped tigers, fighting soldiers and hunters blowing their horns? In one place you see many bodies under a single head, in another several heads on a single body. Here on a quadruped we see the tail of a serpent. Over there on a fish we see the head of a quadruped. There we find a beast that is horse up front and goat behind, here another that is horned animal in front and horse behind. In short, so many and so marvelous are the various shapes surrounding us that it is more pleasant to read the marble than the books, and to spend the whole day marveling over these things rather than meditating on the law of God. Good Lord! If we aren’t embarrassed by the silliness of it all, shouldn’t we at least be disgusted by the expense?”[10]

When read closely, Bernhard’s critique is aimed at the use of the imaginative pictures in a monastic environment. However, in churches decorations are appropriate as beautification of the house of the Lord. At least it will not harm the “simple and devout”. He does not emphasize the potential of the pictures for their teaching, but when arguing against the use in monasteries says: “…is more pleasant to read than the books”. In other words, it is natural to Bernard that images are objects to be read.

This understanding is stated more directly in the writings of the French theologian William Durandus (c 1230-1296) some 150 years later:

Whatever belongs to the liturgical offices, objects, and furnishings of the Church is full of signs of the divine and the sacred mysteries, and each of them overflows with a celestial sweetness when it is encountered by a diligent observer who can extract honey from rock and oil from the stoniest ground.[11]

In other words, everything ecclesiastical can be used as means of teaching; everything carries meaning when read in the right way. This post-Romanesque but still relevant attitude towards church art opens for many readings and offers good support in the search for meaning in the lion motif. Ca 70 verses and a total of 140 references with the word “lion”, makes it the most common wild animal in the Bible.[12] More than 90 per cent of the quotes are in the Old Testament and in general offer a rather realistic picture of the Lion. The texts were written by men who had first-hand experience of the frightening and dangerous predator. The following quotes are a representative selection of different uses of the lion in the Biblical texts.[13]

In a great majority of the references the strength and courage of the lion, as well as its dangerous fierceness, is the main content. Often the lion is presented in a purely descriptive way, sometimes it has clear positive connotations: The wicked flee when no one pursues, but the righteous are bold as a lion. (Proverbs 28:1) The lion, which is mightiest among beasts and does not turn back before any; (Proverbs 30:30)

In the Old Testament the lion is often used as a symbol of the people of Israel. Often it is its aggression that is emphasized, but that is in character with the militant ideals of the Old Testament. These  qualities acquired opposite connotations in the New Testament and the teachings of Jesus. Old Testament examples are:

Judah is a lion’s cub; from the prey, my son, you have gone up. He stooped down; he crouched as a lion and as a lioness; who dares rouse him? (Genesis 49:9)

And one of the elders said to me, “Weep no more; behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has conquered, so that he can open the scroll and its seven seals.” (Revelation 5:5) [14]

As the lion is used to represent the people of God, it is also used as his tool in the struggle against evil. It is evident that the punishment of those who have left the way of God is no act of the Devil, but the will of the punishing father:

Then he said to him, “Because you have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, behold, as soon as you have gone from me, a lion shall strike you down.” And as soon as he had departed from him, a lion met him and struck him down. (1 Kings 20:36) And at the beginning of their dwelling there, they did not fear the Lord. Therefore the Lord sent lions among them, which killed some of them. (2 Kings 17:25)[15]

Four Bible verses are often quoted as evidence of the diabolic aspect of the lion’s nature. Two of them are nothing more than the common picture of the lion as the strongest and most dangerous power and potential enemy, who can only be defeated by the strongest and by the help of God:

You will tread on the lion and the adder; the young lion and the serpent you will trample underfoot. (Psalm 91:13) Save me from the mouth of the lion! You have rescued me from the horns of the wild oxen! (Psalm 22:21)

The two last verses are concrete parables where the lion represents the Devil. However once more it is not the deeper nature of the lion which is relevant, but its qualities as a dangerous hunter. The point is that anyone who is not prepared and seeks the protection of God will fall prey to the Devil as he would to the lion:

Be sober-minded; be watchful. Your adversary the Devil prowls around like a roaring lion, seeking someone to devour. (1 Peter 5:8) He lurks in ambush like a lion in his thicket; he lurks that he may seize the poor; he seizes the poor when he draws him into his net. (Psalm 10:9)

It is only natural that the pacified lion is one of the elements in the descriptions of Paradise. When God has vanquished evil, the lion will not need to be aggressive:

The wolf and the lamb shall graze together; the lion shall eat straw like the ox, and dust shall be the serpent’s food. They shall not hurt or destroy in all my holy mountain,” says the Lord. (Psalm 10:9)

When the Biblical quotations are read as a totality it becomes clear that the fierce and violent lion, found in all these allegories, is used neutrally concerning the antagonism between good and evil. The lion is a simple picture of powerful strength. The lion is likened both to the just cause of the Jews and to God, as well as to the threatening Devil. In the great majority of cases the lion is either likened to God or his people, or serves him by punishing the unjust. As the lion in the Bible is mostly used in the theological context of the Old Testament it is necessary to go to medieval, Christian sources to study how the conception of the animal developed. The Latin Physiologus and the derived Bestiaries were among the most widespread books of the 12th and 13th centuries. Two fragments of the Physiologus in Norse have survived on Iceland, both without the chapter concerning the lion. They were both written ca 1200, and are evidence of this material being part of the 12th-century Norse knowledge tradition.[16] Although the Bestiaries were compilations of some natural observations they were mainly symbolic interpretations of the characteristics of animals and birds. These interpretations are part of a theological, didactic tradition, and have moved a long way from the realistic familiarity with the real predator of the Bible. The first entry is normally the Lion. The following excerpt is from T.H. White’s translation of an English 12th-century Bestiary.[17] As this text is essential to assess the possible meaning of the lion in church art in the high middle ages, the most relevant passages of the text are quoted here:

Leo the Lion, mightiest of beasts, will stand up to anybody. …‘leon’ has also been translated as ‘king’ from Greek into Latin, owing to the fact that he is the Prince of All Animals. ….

Scientists say that Leo has three principal characteristics. His ﬁrst feature is that he loves to saunter on the tops of mountains. Then, if he should happen to be pursued by hunting men, the smell of the hunters reaches up to him, and he disguises his spoor behind him with his tail. Thus the sportsmen cannot track him.

It was in this way that our Savior…once hid the spoor of his love in the high places, until, being sent by the Father, he came down into the womb of the Virgin Mary and saved the human race which had perished.

The Lion’s second feature is, that when he sleeps, he seems to keep his eyes open. In this very way, Our Lord also, while sleeping in the body, was buried after being cruciﬁed—yet his Godhead was awake.

The third feature is this, that when a lioness gives birth to her cubs, she brings them forth dead and lays them up lifeless for three days—until their father, coming on the third day, breathes in their faces and makes them alive.

Just so did the Father Omnipotent raise Our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead on the third day. Quoth Jacob: ‘He shall sleep like a lion, and the lion’s whelp shall be raised.’

So far as their relations with men are concerned, the nature of lions is that they do not get angry unless they are wounded. …

The compassion of lions, on the contrary, is clear from innumerable examples—for they spare the prostrate; they allow such captives as they come across to go back to their own country; they prey on men rather than on women, and they do not kill children except when they are very hungry. …

All the qualities of the lion in the Bestiary are either positive or morally neutral. It does not directly present the lion as a picture of Christ, but draws several parallels between the characteristics of the lion and Christ. The lion is first and foremost strong and mighty and able to kill, but restrains himself and does not kill without good reason. There are no references to diabolic sides to the lion. What the Bestiary does however is to demonstrate the rich associations embedded in the image of the lion to the medieval mind. Based on the texts from the Bible and the Bestiaries it is possible to determine some common features of the lion. The lion is the prince of the animals through its strength, courage, stately appearance and noble character. The lion is fair and does not harm the just, except when very hungry. It is a fierce animal and when it attacks, it is very dangerous. Only the strongest of men can defeat the lion. The question is therefore not if the lion is evil or good. That depends on the position of its counterpart.[18] The essence of the lion is its strength. A review of the substantial material on Romanesque lion depictions makes it clear that even if most of the qualities of the lion are universal, the roles of the lion are very diverse. Based on written sources and established pictorial traditions it is possible to define at least 12 distinct roles played by the lion. In some cases a single role is clear cut and easy to identify, often more roles are present in one representation. The lion as symbol of the ruler has ancient roots. Through its stately appearance and impressive force, it is a natural symbol for a king or emperor.  A Biblical reference to the royal symbolism of the lion is found in the description of Salomon’s throne: The king also made a great ivory throne and overlaid it with the finest gold. The throne had six steps, and the throne had a round top and on each side of the seat were armrests and two lions standing beside the armrests, while twelve lions stood there, one on each end of a step on the six steps.[20]

The lion carrying or flanking throne chairs has since become a convention which can be seen both on royal thrones and the thrones of saints and bishops.

The lion is the most used heraldic animal together with the eagle. Four of the Nordic countries still have the lion in the National Coat of Arms.[21] The roots of this use however goes back to the coats of arms of the medieval Royal families, established in the 12th century.
The lion as a representation of God is found in a Norse textual source from ca 1200: Old Norwegian Homily book. The sermon on the day of St John the Evangelist states that the four beings not only symbolize the four evangelists, they can also represent the Lord himself.[22] Based on St John’s Revelations as quoted above, Christ is described as “the Lion of the Tribe of Judea”.[23] This allegory associates the Majestic lion to Christ the King, one of Christ’s central roles. The lion as a parallel symbol of the King and Christ gives a meaningful interpretation of the Danish Jelling stone (c 965) pointed out by art historian Signe Horn Fuglesang: The key monument of the Christianization of Denmark represents both the earthly and the heavenly ruler. A large proportion of the lions in Romanesque ecclesiastical art are guardians of the church, often constituting part of the architectural sculpture of the portal. Either as a round sculpture flanking and often carrying the portal as is common in Italy, or as reliefs on tympanums or jambs. The lions in that pose can be found on many Scandinavian stone churches while a variant developed on the Norwegian stave churches. Lion heads are often found integrated in the carved reliefs of fighting dragons on the jambs, while lions sculpted in the round are found on the capitals flanking the portal opening. Art historian Erla Hohler describes this type as “the guardian capital lion”, however she sees it as an adoption of a foreign convention, void of meaning.[25]

There is however, all reason to assume that the lion’s qualities as a guardian was obvious also to the Norse viewer. Not only is it powerful and frightening and thus able to discourage potential attackers. According to the Bestiary, it also has the quality of sleeping with open eyes. In addition, it has been argued that the lion has an apotropaic effect.[26]

A closer look at the lions in the context of the portal reveals that some are aggressive and some seemingly peaceful. This is especially evident where the lion is represented together with a human being or another animal as on many of the Romanesque Italian portals. Often the impression of the lion as a dominator is confirmed, for instance when there are claw marks on the back of the underlying man.[27] On the other hand the posture of the guardian lion in the cathedral of Ferrara, Emilia-Romagna, is clearly protective towards the underlying sheep.[28] This relationship will be discussed later, but the general point is that the relation to the accompanying figure does not affect the understanding of the function as a gatekeeper. Often the Romanesque lion can be seen supporting objects of physical or symbolical weight. Thrones have already been mentioned, other such objects are baptismal fonts, pulpits, the pillars of the church portal or even the church building itself. Art historian Frans Carlson has made a convincing argument, explaining much of the figurative Romanesque building sculpture as supporting the church: concretely bearing the church building, symbolically supporting the church as an institution.[29] The lion is one of the central motifs in the architectural sculpture that is included in his argument, as supporters of ecclesia universalis.

Often these lions also function in the role as guards. One example is the baptismal font of St. Mary’s Church, Stafford, England. Two lions support the basin of the font and a text on the rim states: “He is unwise who does not flee from these lions.”[30] The lions both carry the font and guard the holy baptismal water. Sometimes the strength and fierceness of the lion is not only shown as a potential, but the lion is shown in the act of attacking an opponent or even devouring a man. These aggressive lions make up a relatively small proportion of the total number of representations but are important as they highlight some of the lion’s most significant characteristics. As shown, the Bible and other theological sources give many examples of how these frightening qualities of the lion are used to describe the danger of disobedience to God as well as association with the Devil. However the lion is not diabolic in the sense that he leads people into sin. When found attacking a person we can normally rest assured that the victim of his rage is not innocent. The prey is a sinner who deserves his punishment. Thus, the lion is basically a tool of justice, not of the Devil. It is this “Janitor of Justice” which swallows the leg on the portal of Værnes church, Nord Trøndelag. An interesting nuance of this role is the lion on a late 12th-century capital in the Bode Museum in Berlin. The lion spews out his human prey on the Day of Judgement, to deliver his victim to his final sentence by God himself. One of the characteristics of the lion according to the Bestiary is that he will spare the man who prostrates himself. If this rather unrealistic quality of the lion was not added to his myth he would not be as useful as a servant of good. This quality makes it clear that the devout and humble have nothing to fear from the terrible lion. Daniel in the lion’s den is one prominent example. The just Daniel is saved but his unjust persecutors are devoured by the same lions, as soon as the cards are turned.

On the tympanum of the cathedral of Jaca, Aragon an inscription removes all doubt about the relation between the two lions and a man and beast kneeling down for the lions. The text above the lion to the left reads: “The lion knows to spare he who prostrates himself, as Christ forgives he who prays”. The inscription above the other lion reads: “The mighty lion destroys the empire of death”.[31] This image sheds light on the relationship between the guardian lions and their companions discussed above, and shows that the lions will indeed protect those who seek protection. The second text refers to the next role of the lion: as a symbol of resurrection.

In the normal situation where there is no inscription to aid interpretation, we can expect the lion to be protective towards typical sacrificial animals like the lamb or a pious human, while it will act aggressively towards strong beings such as bears, dragons or snakes, or sinful human beings. The lion as a symbol of resurrection is based on a mythical quality conveyed by the Bestiaries and was adopted by the theologian Honorius of Autun (1080-1154) in his collection of sermons.[32] The lioness gives birth to dead cubs, who are brought to life when the father either breathes or roars at them on their third day. This God-like feature of the lion gives it a strong symbolic meaning as an agent of eternal life. As we saw in Jaca the lion is thought of as a victor over death. That can only be through his role as resurrector.

The motif of the lion breathing on his cubs is found on several Scandinavian wall paintings, but to the author’s knowledge not on any fonts.[33] Still this aspect is probably the key to the interpretation of the countless lions who inhabit Romanesque baptismal fonts. Baptism is seen as a second birth. When confronted with monkeys and rams as at the font of St. Mary’s, Stafford his role of exterminating sin and at the same time giving new life through Christ, depicts the full process of a rebirth. The most common example of the loyal lion in church art is as the companion of St. Jerome. The church father relieved the lion of a thorn in its paw, which made it his most loyal companion for the rest of his life. The lion is often depicted resting peacefully while St Jerome is at his desk writing.

The grateful and loyal lion was also a popular theme in the medieval romances. He is a main character in Le Chevalier au Lion by the author Chrétien de Troyes, written around 1180.[34] The key scenes from that romance are the motifs on the richly carved church door of Valþjófsstaður on Iceland, c 1200. An interesting situation occurs when the strong and normally invincible lion is defeated by someone. That is the ultimate proof that someone is no ordinary person. Defeating a lion is reserved for figures like Hercules, David and Samson. When seen in Christian art it is most often one of the two latter who is the lion slayer. Both motifs are found in several versions in Scandinavian medieval art.

The lion hunt is another version of the same theme. The motif was common on Roman sarcophagi. It shows what is considered the most aristocratic hunt, reserved for kings and noblemen. One interpretation is that the defeated lion symbolizes man’s triumph over death.[35] The font in Munkbrarup, Syd Schleswig shows a Romanesque version of the ancient motif.[36]

Even when defeated the lion stand out as a symbol of strength through the valor of his adversaries. Adversely the power of his vanquishers is highlighted through the act of killing the lion. In the same way, one aspect of a lion under the foot of St. Mary or other saints is to show the power of the saint, while the trampling on the Devil is the most common modern interpretation.[37] Both are relevant. It may be a parallel to the male heroes defeating the lion with raw power, showing that through the strength of God a feeble woman can also dominate the strongest. The zodiac has its roots in Babylonia, but was adopted by both the Greeks and the Romans and was therefore a natural part of the pictorial language of the first Christians. Leo stems from the star constellation of that name. It is a fire sign and his month is in high summer when the sun is fierce. Leo is a sign of masculinity and energy. The lion’s strength is once more the key, but an added aspect is the lion as a symbol of the Sun. In Christian art Leo may be found on his own or associated with summer tasks. Either way he is part of a representation of the cycle of the year.

The motif is not very common in Scandinavia, but Sem church, Vestfold has some of the signs as reliefs on one of its portals and the Zodiac is found in frescos in Hvorslev church, Viborg amt (1175-1200). The lion as symbol of St. Mark the evangelist is normally easily distinguished as he is winged and often caries a book or a scroll. The motif is found in Scandinavia all through the Middle Ages, but commonly together with the three other Evangelist symbols.[39] The Old Norwegian Homily Book explains why the lion is the sign of St Mark.[40] He is the evangelist most concerned with the Lord’s resurrection, and as the Homily continues, the lion is a symbol of the resurrection through its way of giving life to the cubs on the third day. Once more we see how the different meanings attributed to the lion overlap.

The symbols of the evangelists are also parallels to the four living creatures of the Revelation: “The first living creature like a lion, the second living creature like an ox, the third living creature with the face of a man, and the fourth living creature like an eagle in flight”. 1 Peter 5:8 is often cited and is the main basis for a common opinion in much art historical literature from the 19th century on, that the lion can regularly be interpreted as a representation of the Devil. Several of the other Bible verses cited above also use the fierce lion as a warning to be vigilant against evil. As argued above, Peter uses the lion as a likeness for Satan’s dangerous power. It is a strong warning illustrated by the lion’s well known characteristics. When the lion is operating alone, aggressiveness towards the sinner may be seen as the work of God as much as an act of the Devil.[42] However when the lion is coupled with the dragon in pursuit of a man, it is natural to associate their work with the Devil. The dragon is never a positive force in Christian art, and so the lion is degraded by his company. An example of this is the so called, Devil from Oslo, from the 12th-century St Hallvard Cathedral. In this case the popular name probably corresponds with the medieval intention.

Few of the references to the fierce lion in medieval literature conclusively equate the animal and the Devil. However St. Augustine (354-430) says in one of his sermons that while the bear has its strength in the claws and the lion in its jaws, these two animals constitute the image of the Devil.[43] Pairings of lions and bears are not very common but many images of lions are open to interpretation. Many a priest will have preached about the diabolic lion through the centuries, as well as many art historians.

The lion as a representation of the Devil is a relevant interpretation in some cases, but is not the general role of the lion in Romanesque art. A close and careful reading is necessary to decide which role the lion is playing in each case, and due to the complex interplay between God and the Devil the answer is often not straightforward. To show how the lion was adopted and put to use in Scandinavian 12th-century church art, the great variety of lion motifs in Værnes church, Nord Trøndelag, offers a suitable case for study. The lion is the most common motif in the sculpture of the church. Only on the roof beams are other motifs also found.

Two out of three portals are decorated with sculpted lions and probably the third portal had lions as well. Several lion heads are found at the ends of the roof beams in the interior. In total around 18 lions decorate the church.[44] Six are carved in stone and a dozen carved in wood. Lions are the only figurative motifs in stone, while the wooden lions have rather varied company, being part of a suite of 39 preserved beam stops, out of 40. The most striking fact is that the master behind the architecturally rich church of Værnes chose the lion as the only external, figurative decoration (Fig. 14). Could the lion convey all the messages desired, or was the only aim to show beautiful craftsmanship, equating the lions to the star ornaments and profiles? First of all it is essential to note that most of the lions are preserved in their original position. The only exception being a group of protruding heads flashing their teeth that now flank a window high up on the southern wall of the nave. Three heads are well preserved, a fourth survives only as a fragment (Figs. 15-16). However, they are believed to belong to the original southern portal which has been enlarged without ornamentation. The present situation as well as the probable original positioning of the lion sculptures place them all in marginal positions: in the liminal zone of the church.[45] The concept of the liminal zone has been developed by Margrete Syrstad Andås, as a refinement of the widespread use of the “margin” as a term. The liminal zone is the border of the Holy space of the Church building, and as such is important, both in a liturgical and a ritual respect. This in turn explains why portals, windows and the transition between the church wall which is consecrated and the roof which is not, are very often rich in architectural sculpture or even the only place where it can be found in a church. This may also be the key to the interpretation of the sculpture. The lions at Værnes are not a homogenous group at first glance. They differ stylistically  as well as in material and expression. The heads surrounding the south window make a group, so do the heads of the roof beams while the two portal lions are rather different but stylistically related. Dendrochronological dating shows only 6 years between the roof of the chancel and the eastern part of the nave.[46] This indicates rapid building and a short timespan between the two portal lions. On stylistic grounds however the portal sculpture is dated some 10-20 years prior to the chancel roof from 1143.[47] The roof of the nave was completed in 1161 which suggests a 30–40-year timespan between the chancel lion and the lion heads in the roof construction and the possible south portal. Though there is no unity in style, it is likely that the sculptures form part of a single concept. The lion in the chancel portal is presented above as an example of the punishing lion. It also functions as a guardian lion. That is also a function of the lion in the tympanum of the north portal. However, this lion has a pose which is associated with both the royal lion and the Godhead lion as well. The church was originally built on the initiative of the king, the lion as a symbol of regnum and sacerdotum is therefore relevant.

The protruding lion heads of the south window show their teeth aggressively and are  primarily conceived as guardians. That is a function which is relevant for the secondary position by the window, but which would be much more prominent if they belonged to the south portal as presumed. Thus the stone lions represent at least four of the lion’s possible roles.

What about the wooden lions up in the roof? As they are inside, the role of guardian lions is not as likely. But if their position in the liminal zone towards the ceiling is taken into account it becomes a possibility. One of the lions (Fig. 17.)has a man in the mouth and is therefore also a punisher. Their company is mixed with different fantastic creatures, of which none is positively evil however. On each side of the church a man’s head with hands holding snakes on each side, is a clear picture of vanquished evil. Viewed as a group the lions seem to be the guard corps of Værnes church. They are all placed in the liminal zone where the guardian lions belong. Both strength and vigilance through sleeping with open eyes are qualities of invoked here. The lions are in the service of God through their protection of the church. Even the two lions which are depicted in the act of devouring sinners, must be understood in this way.

When considered one by one, it is difficult to argue for a positive and unambiguous interpretation of the lions, especially those high up in the ceiling. However, the pieces fit together as part of a program. There are good arguments to claim that the intention behind the lions in Værnes church is more than decorative. It is also most likely that the priests used the lions didactically, be it as symbols of ecclesia universalis, warning against sin or pictures of the power of God. The lion serves all these purposes and many more, which is probably the reason for its popularity in Romanesque art even in Scandinavia. Based on the rich material in the Bible and the Bestiaries as well as the wealth of motifs in Romanesque church art, there are good reasons to argue that the lion conveyed meaning to the average medieval beholder. A pictorial motif like the pair of lions flanking a tree retained its significance even if it travelled as decoration on silk materials.

On the other hand, it is reasonable to believe that the decoration of a church both to honor God and the men behind the building was also a motive for having sculpture and paintings made. When found in medallions or friezes along with other animals and hybrids, good or bad, it is quite obvious that didactics was not the issue. Even in that situation a lion is a lion and brings with it all the associations discussed above. The strength of images is such that the beholder is unable to see a familiar image without reading into it some meaning based on parallels.

The original meaning could of course be corrupted as the lion motif travelled and it would at least be adjusted to the beholder’s culture and religion. As the same mythic and religious motifs can be found across long distances in time and space, the pictorial traditions are often remarkably stable. There is a very clear line from the ancient Orient, through antiquity to the medieval conception of the lion and its meaning. It is first and foremost a symbol of strength, power and dignity. Those are qualities that are never absent from the image of the lion.

Of the twelve lion typos presented above nine are undoubtedly positive, two are ambiguous – the punishing and the defeated lion – and only the satanic lion is definitely negative. It is therefore reasonable to believe that the general association provoked by the image of a lion without a clear context have been positive. If not, it would not have served as a general symbol of God, kings and saints.

In this article the question of how studies of wooden churches in Finland were influenced by Strzygowski, one of the most important European art historians of his day, is also of interest from the perspective of Finnish art history. Discussion and growing interest in the old wooden church building tradition is traced in particular in the work of Lars Pettersson (1918–1993), who began his career in art-historical research in the late 1930s. Throughout his career, Pettersson studied historic wooden churches and chapels in both Finland and Russian Karelia. With reference to a few selected examples concerning the cross-plan churches of Petäjävesi and Ruovesi, my article focuses on how Pettersson’s studies reveal an alternating dialectic of acceptance of and opposition to Strzygowski’s views and ideas.

A comparison of their methods reveals a number of similar trains of thought. This cannot be just a coincidence, since Pettersson was already familiar with several studies by Josef Strzygowski when he was writing his master’s thesis. Pettersson’s work as a researcher was naturally influenced by many other factors, such as working for several years for the State Archaeological Commission and the role of the Swedish architect and Professor Erik Lundberg as his doctoral supervisor. It is nonetheless necessary to consider Strzygowski’s and Pettersson’s shared methods of art-historical research which their contemporaries regarded as important. 
In October and November 1923, a series of three articles on 18th-century wooden churches in Finland appeared in the Hufvudstadsbladet newspaper published in Helsinki.[1] They were written in a deeply admiring tone regarding this aspect of the Finnish architectural heritage. The churches of Keuruu and Petäjävesi, mentioned in the articles, had hardly aroused any major nationwide interest before these enthusiastic articles by Professor Josef Strzygowski (1862–1941). The interest of the readers was no doubt also spurred by the debate that followed in the wake of the newspaper articles.[2]

The present article discusses the influence of Strzygowski, one of the most important European art historians of his day, on studies of old wooden churches in Finland, an issue that is also of interest from the overall perspective of Finnish art history. The work of art historian Lars Pettersson (1918–1993), who began his career in the late 1930s, especially reflected his growing interest in the old wooden church building tradition and related discussion. Throughout his career, Pettersson studied historic wooden churches and chapels in Finland and Russian Karelia. With reference to a few selected examples concerning the cross-plan churches of Petäjävesi and Ruovesi, my article focuses on how Pettersson’s work displays an alternating dialectic of acceptance and opposition regarding Strzygowski’s views and ideas. Josef Strzygowski was appointed professor of art history at the University of Vienna in 1909, but he was also the first professor of art history at Åbo Akademi University in the early 1920s. He has remained a highly contradictory figure in the history of the discipline. As Lars Berggren has pointed out, the history of art history has also been written by its so-called victors.[3] In this case, the victors were those who defined what constituted the art history of the Vienna school. Their narrative left no room for Josef Strzygowski. His role, however, has been reassessed in the 21st century in both publications and international conferences on the history of the discipline.[4]

Professor Lars Berggren has thoroughly explained how, and for what reasons, Josef Strzygowski became for a few years the first professor of art history at the newly established Åbo Akademi University.[5] Strzygowski had already been appointed professor of art history at the University of Graz in 1892. In these years, he also published his major works Orient oder Rom (1901) and Kleinasien. Ein Neuland der Kunstgeschichte (1903), in which he expounded his core notion that classical art history had neglected the ancient cultures of the east and the north by focusing solely on the Mediterranean region. He wanted to emphasize prehistoric and Early Christian art in the regions of the Middle East and Iran, challenging in a sense the whole geography of contemporary art history.[6] In 1909, both Strzygowski and Max Dvorák (1894–1921) were appointed to professorships in art history at the University of Vienna after a series of heated disputes on research policy. Neither was Austrian: Strzygowski was born in Silesia in present-day Poland and Dvorák was a Czech. In his research, Mark Rampley has pointed to the sensitive political and ideological contexts of nationality and language policies in the Austro-Hungarian Empire.[7] After the First World War, Austria-Hungary disappeared off the map, like other European empires. In the difficult situation in Vienna after the war, Josef Strzygowski received assistance for his family from Sweden, where his children had been sent.[8] Understandably, he also tried to find a new place to work closer to his family, which led him to apply for professorships in Tartu, Estonia and Poland, and later to accept the invitation to the professorship in Turku.[9]

It is also necessary to explicate Strzygowski’s ideas which led him into conflict with the art historians of the period. He took a critical view of the importance given to textual sources in the Vienna School of art history since the days of Rudolf von Eitelberger (1817–1885). Strzygowski’s argument was that the ‘philological approach’ of his colleagues was an obstacle to disciplinary autonomy for art history. He gave primacy to research into material objects (Sachforschung), beginning with basic physical description.[10] By 1916 Strzygowski had laid down his geographical determinants and racial foundations of Asian art. His main theme was a connection between Europe, especially Northern Europe, and Asia based on an assumed Indo-Aryan (Indo-Germanic) axis.[11] Assessments of his work today point out that he was the most radical Orientalist of his period, whose deconstruction of the myth of classicism also focused critical attention on the Eurocentric bias of the discipline. Strzygowski, however, has also been accused of anti-Semitism and Nazi sympathies, but present research has viewed these allegations in a critical light.[12]

Before addressing Finnish research on wooden churches, it is still necessary to return to the above-mentioned public debate in Helsinki’s leading Swedish-language daily newspaper.[13] The interlocutors, Josef Strzygowski and Karl Konrad Meinander (1872–1933), keeper at the National Museum of Finland, continued their exchange of opinions in a more limited forum when Meinander published his incensed  article “Finlands träbyggnadskonst och prof. Strzygowski” (Wooden architecture in Finland and Professor Strzygowski) in Finskt Museum, a scholarly and professional series in the disciplines of the museums sector.[14] Strzygowski’s reply[15] appeared two years later in the series in 1925, with Meinander only adding a brief postscript to it.[16] K. K. Meinander had worked at the National Museum since 1899, specializing in medieval altarpieces and sculptures in Finnish churches. He was a Swedish-speaker, Swedish-minded and strongly anti-Russian while Finland was an autonomous Grand Duchy of the Russian Empire. His professional interests lay in the study of Finnish older art, and he remained personally loyal to the National Museum all his life.[17]

Interestingly, in 1927, a few years after this emotionally heated polemic, composer and choir director Heikki Klemetti (1876–1953), also an amateur historian of highly nationalistic orientation, published his extensive study of wooden churches in Finland.[18] Klemetti presented his own widely respected views on the subject and laid the actual foundation for research in this specific field. It can be said that these discussions and published texts gave the study of older wooden churches in Finland a new and more serious basis. Strzygowski’s professorship at Åbo Akademi was renewed on a yearly basis and he taught several courses in the spring and autumn terms from 1921 until the spring of 1925, after which the appointment was no longer continued.[19] During his years in Finland, he went on long excursions to different parts of the country to study older wooden church architecture. Strzygowski wrote his first newspaper article on this subject while returning to Turku by train from a field trip to Central Finland.[20] The main points of his three newspaper articles on wooden churches can be summarized as follows: genuine interest and concern about the protection and study of the oldest wooden churches as they were being replaced by more modern and larger churches; the open question of whether the timber construction tradition had evolved independently in Finland or elsewhere in Europe or Asia, while regarding the wooden church building as the oldest phenomenon of its kind in Finland; seeking evidence of how 18th-century cruciform-plan churches in Finland had evolved as independent vernacular architecture when the Reformation shifted the focus of divine service to the sermon, and how the Bothnian block-pillar churches had paved the way for cruciform plan churches as the pillars permitted easy enlargement; the specialty of the dome not being visible outside and the lack of daylight from above in wooden churches. In later connections, he also underlined the 135-degree angles typical of the cruciform-plan churches.

Offended by Strzygowski’s criticism of the National Museum of Finland, Meinander wrote articles in reply that sought to disprove almost all of the former’s claims, especially the point that vernacular builders themselves had designed the churches that they built.[21]

Heikki Klemetti’s enthusiastically written work on Finnish church builders was based on extensive archive research and it addressed many of the points debated by Strzygowski and Meinander. Klemetti had studied both Finnish archive materials and building administration documents concerning Finland issued by the Swedish government authority known as the Superintendent’s Bureau (Överintendentsämbetet). This material was in the collections of the Swedish Board of Public Building (Byggnadsstyrelsen) and the Swedish State Archives (Riksarkivet).[22]  Based on this information, he was able for the first time to identify by name almost a hundred self-taught builders and give a more detailed picture of their role in church-building projects in the 18th century. Klemetti did not particularly focus on the structural design of churches or typical features of their plans, but published instead numerous drawings of churches and photographs of them as completed.

Klemetti’s most important achievement was to demonstrate how Finnish church builders in the second half of the 18th century found ways to bypass the regulations of the central government authorities in Sweden. A royal statute issued in 1759 decreed that the Lutheran congregations of Finland had to send their plans for new churches to Stockholm to be approved as a condition for receiving assistance from collection funds gathered throughout the Kingdom of Sweden.[23] In many cases, the plans went to the Superintendent’s Bureau where a trained architect would make improvements to them according to prevailing ideals of style. The process, however, required royal approval and the preparation of plans could take several years during which the congregations had already or almost completed their churches by the time the plans were finally returned from Sweden. Klemetti thus disproved the earlier suggestion, by Juhani Rinne, that all the Finnish wooden churches of the second half of the 18th century had been designed at the Superintendent’s Bureau in Stockholm.  In his debate with Strzygowski K. K. Meinander had relied on this view. Klemetti also commented on Strzygowski’s newspaper articles and shared his concerns, about the extremely poor condition of Petäjävesi Church for instance.[24]

In his articles, Josef Strzygowski gratefully acknowledged the considerable assistance that he had received from Dr. Carolus Lindberg (1889–1955), an architect and assistant at the Department of Architecture of the Helsinki University of Technology. Lindberg had made collections of photographs and measured drawings of the churches available to Strzygowski.[25] He had also continued the documentation of older works of architecture and the preparation of measured drawings of them, which had already been in progress at the University of Technology.[26] In 1927, he published a general work on Finnish architecture in which the evolution of wooden churches was particularly considered with reference to the Bothnian block-pillar churches and the early cruciform-plan churches.[27] In his article, Lindberg also took part in the discussion started by Strzygowski. He refuted Strzygowski’s suggestions that the shape of the cruciform-plan church was explained by the Protestant faith with its emphasis on the sermon in divine service.[28] Carolus Lindberg’s major work, however, was completed in the 1930s with the publication of Suomen kirkot, Finlands kyrkor (Churches of Finland) in separate volumes in Finnish and Swedish.[29] It presented, together with briefly listed factual information, all the churches known in Finland at the time. Although this alone was a major achievement, the appended typology of the churches according to their different plans at the end of the book in both language versions is particularly worth mentioning. Over the decades, it has been a guide to the history of church-building in Finland. In the spring of 1939, Lars Pettersson, a young Swedish-speaking student of art history, submitted to Onni Okkonen, Professor of Art History at the University of Helsinki,  his master’s thesis of several hundred pages with the ambitiously worded  heading  Den finska träkyrkoarkitekturen: dess ursprung, utveckling och ställning i timmerbyggnadskonsten samt dess förhållande till de historiska stilarna (The architecture of wooden churches in Finland: its origins, development, position in wooden architecture and relationship with historical styles) .[30] Pettersson’s thesis referred to earlier research in aiming at a preliminary overview of the distinctive features of wooden church architecture in Finland and the origin of its features of form and style. The size of the thesis suggests that Pettersson and his supervisor intended the work to develop into a doctoral dissertation.[31] These plans, however, were halted by the dramatic events of world history in the autumn of 1939. War broke out between Finland and the Soviet Union at the end of November 1939. At the time, Pettersson was a conscript in reserve officer school and he immediately volunteered in January 1940 to fight in the so-called Winter War of 1939 –1940. The war delayed Pettersson’s university studies and he did not complete his master’s degree until May 1941.[32] When war broke out again between Finland and the Soviet Union in June 1941[33], Pettersson, too, served in the army for several years.[34] Finnish forces soon advanced into Russian Karelia beyond the former Finnish-Soviet border. The documentation and protection of the cultural heritage in the newly occupied areas and the collection of related information required experts. In the autumn of 1942, Pettersson was posted as a so-called military civil servant to document the churches and ecclesiastical objects of Finnish-occupied Russian Karelia.[35] The immense material that was documented shifted Pettersson’s interest for years from the wooden churches of Finland to study of the wooden Orthodox churches and chapels of Russian Karelia. He defended his doctoral dissertation on this topic in 1950[36], and only gradually after that did he resume his interrupted research of the late 1930s on the old wooden churches of Finland. Pettersson wrote so many studies on these Finnish churches that no overview of them can be given here. A few chosen examples, however, show how their central questions are related to Josef Strzygowski’s claims and suggestions of the 1920s concerning older wooden churches in Finland. Pettersson addressed this overall theme for the first time in his master’s thesis and its questions and hypotheses were explored in later studies.

In his master’s thesis, Pettersson discussed the points raised by Strzygowski, noting first how heatedly his observations were received in professional circles in Finland. He also mentioned that after Strzygowski returned to Austria he also discussed Finnish churches in his later works.[37] Pettersson considered Strzygowski’s methods to be based too much on aesthetic considerations, which he felt often led the conclusions in the wrong direction.[38] He pointed out, however: “Regardless of what can said against Strzygowski’s theories, we must nonetheless admit that perhaps more than anyone else he has drawn attention to the question of the origin of our wooden churches and their position within wooden architecture”.[39] The problems that Pettersson touched upon in his thesis still remained unresolved at least partly because he was unable to study first-hand sources in Finland or elsewhere. But he was already outlining his own view of the stylistic background of the Finnish churches, clearly linking them to western ideas, particularly from Sweden and distancing himself from Strzygowski’s general theory of Slavic-Asian influence.  Petäjävesi:

    “Aber nicht die Lage, sodern die genial Bauart ist es, die den Forscher mit Bewunderung erfüllt, so dass er sagen muss, wenn das, was ich hier vor mir sehe, finländisch ist, dann wird Finland [sic] noch einmal einen sehr hervorragenden Platz in der Kunstgeschichte bekommen müssen.”[41]

The cruciform wooden church of Petäjävesi, which made such a deep impression on Strzygowski, is in Central Finland, north of Lake Päijänne. [42] It also interested Heikki Klemetti, who identified folk builder Jaakko Klemetinpoika Leppänen (died 1769) as having designed and built the church together with his assistants in 1763–1765.[43]  Strzygowski gave the wooden churches of Finland an important role especially in his discussion of vaulting together with corner-joined blockwork construction. Josef Strzygowski’s method of comparative art history, with its admiration of the natural sciences, consisted of an objective description of monuments in the manner of an inventory, a survey of materials and conditions, and a study of all relevant historical sources. It also included analyses of the characteristic features of form and style of the monuments studied and their further analysis with the aid of visual sources. The principles of comparative art research also called for discussion of similarities and explanations for them.[44] The wooden “cross-vault churches” (Kreutzkuppelkirchen), as he called them, with Petäjävesi as a simple example, formed for Strzygowski an interesting group in Finland, since the dome of the vault was not visible on the outside.[45] The vaulted wooden churches of Finland had another quite common special feature that interested him, vaulting without fenestration.[46] The interior of the cruciform church of Petäjävesi has exceptionally impressive wooden vaults, with steep-sided barrel vaulting of rounded angular shape over the transepts. At the junction of the transepts there is a high ceiling dome on pendentives ending in an octagonal top part.[47]

Petäjävesi Church was abandoned in 1879, when the parish erected a new church designed by architect August Boman and constructed by folk builder Jaakko Kuorikoski.[48] In 1949, the State Archaeological Commission gave Lars Pettersson the task of investigating the old church and preparing a plan for its renovation.[49] He thus acquired at an early stage a thorough idea of the constructional details of the church. Pettersson openly acknowledged Josef Strzygowski’s role in having Petäjävesi Church recognized in Finland as a masterpiece of wooden architecture.[50] He disagreed, however, already in his master’s thesis with Strzygowski’s proposed evolution of the cruciform-plan churches. Strzygowski had suggested that the need to enlarge the block-pillar churches of Ostrobothnia led in an autochthonous way, as it were, to cruciform-plan churches in Finland.[51] Pettersson, in turn, underlined that the absence of the block pillars made it necessary to seek new and structurally more solid solutions, one of which was the cruciform plan.[52] In his later research, Pettersson returned to the constructional details of Petäjävesi Church and though he felt that Heikki Klemetti had for the most part correctly interpreted the preparatory documents of the original church project, he arrived at different results in some matters.[53] They concerned the preserved floor plan of the church, which he maintained could not have been by Jaakko Klemetinpoika Leppänen, but had possibly been drawn by the local vicar.[54] Pettersson found this matter to be interesting, because the floor plan did not correspond to Leppänen’s estimate of costs.

Pettersson’s research method was surprisingly similar to the comparative art research that Strzygowski called for. He, too, proceeded from an objective inventory of the actual monument and its material. In this case, it involved a thorough constructional survey of the whole church, one course of logs at a time. The results showed that the church was actually built according to Leppänen’s estimate, following the dimensions of the lumber given in it. But Pettersson also wanted to gain a better understanding of how Leppänen, the first folk builder known by name in the North Päijänne region, had chosen such demanding and spatially surprising solutions as those of the ceiling and vaults at Petäjävesi. He attributed Finnish influences in this case to folk builder Arvi Junkkarinen (1716 –1777), among whose works Korpilahti Church and especially the cruciform church of Kärkölä (1754) were familiar to Leppänen. The arrangement of the interior and the vaults of Kärkölä Church closely resembled the design of Petäjävesi Church.[55] On other hand, like Strzygowski, Pettersson also sought broader channels of influence, albeit specifically in Sweden to which Finland belonged. He claimed that the churches built in Stockholm in the 17th century that followed the concepts of Renaissance and Baroque centralized plans were at least indirect background influences for the Finnish cruciform plan churches.[56]

Ruovesi:

By the 1920s, Strzygowski had compiled an immense corpus of information on wooden construction on different continents and in different countries from Armenia and India to the British Isles and the Nordic countries. In this context, Finland offered a key to some problems that had preoccupied him.[57] One of them concerned the possibility of following in a more unbroken manner than elsewhere the evolution of wooden cruciform plan churches.[58] When considering the possible further versions of dome structures above a square plan, Strzygowski presented the octagonal wooden church examples from Finland, Kylmäkoski in Akaa and Västanfjärd on the island of Kemiö. With their joints at angles of 135 degrees, he regarded them as more interesting than rectangular corner-joined constructions.[59] In Strzygowski’s studies, the final stage of development of this special  jointing type in the cruciform churches is represented by two buildings of similar form, the Church of Velké Karlovice in Moravia and the 24-cornered Church of Queen Sofia Magdalena in Ruovesi, Finland.[60] The spatial arrangement of these churches was based on the chamfered shape of the outside and inside corners, creating a special structure of 24 corners. At least at Ruovesi, where the wooden church had been built in 1777–1778 by folk builder Matti Åkerblom (1740–1819),[61] this polygonal interior space has barrel vaults over the transepts and an octagonal ceiling dome with a level top part, but no higher fenestration.

Josef Strzygowski’s method of comparative art history also informed his interest in Ruovesi Church with its cruciform plan. He maintained that the shared form of a Moravian church and a church on the Kokemäenjoki River in West Finland is not explained solely by influences of Baroque style. He summarized this point as follows: “I am convinced that those blockwork forms were not found as late as the eighteenth century, but that they were already known in what we called the Dark Ages of European art, the pre-Romanesque period.”[62] He was relying here on his own hypotheses of the important heritage of early medieval wooden architecture, the most important structural features of which have survived for centuries in different parts of Europe and in which the development of forms was due to geographic and material-technical features in different regions.[63]

Lars Pettersson, who came from Ruovesi himself, was highly familiar with the churches of the surrounding regions. Concerning the formal evolution of the 24-cornered cruciform church of Ruovesi, Pettersson’s interpretation was that Strzygowski did not, at least in any emphasized way, claim that the ground plans of the Finnish church and the Moravian one derived directly from the pre-Romanesque period. On the other hand, he, too, felt that the 135-degree corner joint could be regarded as a relict of that period.[64] Following Strzygowski, he arrived at the following interpretation:

    “Strzygowski does not strictly deny the influence of the Baroque on the churches of Velké Karlovice and Ruovesi, nor does he posit a direct influence from one church to the other. The similarities would mainly be due to the 135-degree corner characteristic of the corner joints… The overall shape of the church of Velké Karlovice could derive from the pre-Romanesque period and would thus be reflected in the masonry Kochenquadrats. The type represented by Ruovesi Church in Finland is the final form of a series that can be followed in gradual stages.”[65]

Pettersson maintained that Strzygowski included Ruovesi Church in his studies only as additional and comparative material. He did not, however, suggest that the cruciform church type with chamfered outer and inner corners came about in a completely independent way in Finland. Here too, Pettersson refuted Strzygowski’s claim that the cruciform-plan churches had emerged of their own accord from the need to enlarge the block-pillar churches, or alternatively in response to the emphasis on the sermon in Lutheran divine services. Pettersson associated the evolution of the type with the 17th-century centralized-plan churches of Sweden with their chamfered corners and the architecture of burial chapels of the period in Stockholm. Their influence first appeared in Ostrobothnia in Finland, where folk builder Matti Honka constructed a cruciform wooden church with chamfered corners at Alaveteli (1752–1754). Pettersson regarded the 24-cornered churches as reflecting the preferences of the builders and the local decision-makers’ notions of impressive architecture and tended towards a more nuanced view of how this church type had developed. He maintained that the 24-cornered churches were a short-lived bold ground plan experiment that produced a few examples in the region of Ostrobothnia where the population had rapidly increased.[66]

Pettersson had already understood in his graduate thesis the value of Strzygowski’s views for the study of architectural history in Finland, despite occasionally heated opposition to them. He discussed Strzygowski’s views later more extensively in other contexts than the churches of Petäjävesi and Ruovesi, particularly focusing on the 17th-century block-pillar churches of Ostrobothnia, which had also interested Strzygowski. Before his death, Pettersson published in 1987 his magnum opus Templum Saloense. Pohjalaisen tukipilarikirkon arvoitus (English summary: An Early Ostrobothnian Block-Pillar Church and its Background) [67] Space here does not, however, permit a discussion of the specific problematic of these churches.

For these leading researchers of old churches, the political events of Europe in the 20th century influenced their professional choices and to varying degrees lent a specific tone to them and even influenced interpretations. Without the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Josef Strzygowski would hardly have become a professor of art history in a university in Finland in the early 1920s.   The importance of his brief period of teaching should perhaps not be underlined too much, but we must nonetheless note that he influenced the orientation of the discipline at Åbo Akademi, and this influence continued in the teaching and research carried out by his pupil Lars-Ivar Ringbom.[68]

Lars Pettersson experienced the effects of international politics both personally and through his areas of research. His service in the Winter War and the Continuation War both changed his attitudes regarding Finland’s eastern neighbor and the theme of his planned post-graduate research. After the Second World War and during the Cold War, he did not, however, feel that he could continue his work on the Orthodox churches and chapels of Karelia.[69]

Nonetheless, Lars Pettersson’s life’s work as a researcher of wooden churches and chapels in Finland and Russian Karelia is one of the most significant of its kind in Finnish art history. It is also of interest because of a number of features shared by him and Strzygowski, along with the similarities of their research material. They were both particularly interested in the courses of development of wooden architecture in Europe and the origins of the building types that appeared within them.

A comparison of their methods reveals a number of other similar trains of thought. This cannot be just a coincidence, for Pettersson was already familiar with several of Josef Strzygowski’s studies when he was writing his master’s thesis.[70] Pettersson’s research was naturally influenced by many other factors, such as several years of work for the State Archaeological Commission and the role of architect and professor Erik Lundberg as his doctoral supervisor.[71] It is nonetheless necessary to consider his and Strzygowski’s  shared methods of art-historical research which their contemporaries regarded as important.

An important feature of Strzygowski’s comparative method was detailed inventoried information on the building studied, preferably gathered on-site, and the equally detailed presentation of the results with the aid of measured drawings or drawn reconstructions. In addition, the relevant historical source material had to be thoroughly studied. Both scholars also considered reasons for changes in the formal evolution of buildings. Nor were they averse to presenting bold hypotheses as their results, although Pettersson did not always come to the same conclusions as Strzygowski in matters such as central areas from which influences were to have radiated.

Pettersson was, however, particularly careful when speaking of the artistic expression of different peoples, even to the degree that in his dissertation he declined to discuss possible connections between the archaic stylistic features of Karelian churches and the Orthodox Old Believers of the region. Here we can assume a clear distancing from Strzygowski’s ideas about the natural laws of artistic expression rooted in the soil and blood (Blut und Boden) of nations.[72]

Even though Josef Strzygowski’s role is known, it has not been discussed more extensively in Finland, except for the cited article by Lars Berggren. It should therefore be finally pointed out that the attribution to Lars Pettersson of the recognition and discussion of the special nature of the Ostrobothnian block-pillar technique in Finnish art history[73] completely ignores the role of Josef Strzygowski. Strzygowski discussed this architectural innovation, which he regarded as ingenious, in so many published texts that it could not have remained unnoticed by the younger Finnish art historian who was interested in the same topics.

From its inaugural issue in 1873 to the end of the 19th century, the Milan-based illustrated weekly newspaper L’Illustrazione Italiana helped popularize Rome in its new role as the secular capital of modern Italy. This essay explores the implications of its news coverage as more than just documentation, but as implicit endorsement and promotion of the nationalization and secularization of the Eternal City. Following the completion of the Risorgimento, Italy’s reunification movement, one of the biggest challenges facing the newly united nation was overcoming strong regional diversity and a proud tradition of independent republics and small kingdoms. Rome was the only city which all regions could support as the national capital, a central and dominant position reflected in the publication’s masthead. L’Illustrazione Italiana was particularly important in disseminating images to a broad national audience of the architectural projects and ephemeral events in the new national capital relating to Vittorio Emanuele II, the king who oversaw reunification and who best personified the new Italian state. His usefulness as a human embodiment of nationalist values greatly increased with his unexpected death in 1878, not long after the leftist Sinistra party had seized control of parliament. Successive Sinistra leaders actively fashioned projects relating to the king as aggressively patriotic expressions of Italian state power. The pages of L’Illustrazione Italiana chronicled in detail the king’s funerals in the ancient Roman Pantheon, the various events and national pilgrimages to his tomb there, and the contentious restoration of the Pantheon that removed external signs of its ecclesiastical role as a church. No urban project in Rome enjoyed more attention than the lengthy genesis of the Monument to Vittorio Emanuele II, eventually erected on the north slope of the Capitoline. By the time its construction began in 1885, the king had been firmly established as the symbol of the new nation in the capital and his office – and by extension the Italian state – associated with the grandeur of ancient Rome in an effort to symbolize their permanence. Through its selective coverage, focusing disproportionately on projects relating to the king, and its often transparently patriotic text, L’Illustrazione Italiana can be seen as a participant in the shaping of history. 
Although not an official mouthpiece of the royal Italian government, the Milan-based L’Illustrazione Italiana helped popularize the Eternal City in its new role as the national capital of modern Italy.  From its inaugural issue in 1873 (three years after Rome became the capital) to the end of the 19th century, this illustrated weekly newspaper regularly profiled Rome.  One of the biggest challenges facing the newly united nation was overcoming strong regional diversity and a proud tradition of independent republics and small kingdoms.  Rome was the only city that all regions could support as the national capital.  For the Italian state, there was the additional challenge of counteracting the on-going presence of the pope.

L’Illustrazione Italiana was particularly important in disseminating images of the various architectural projects for the new national capital.[1] Central to the propagandizing project of remaking Rome in a new secular image were representations of Vittorio Emanuele II, the king who oversaw the Italian reunification movement and who best personified the new Italian state.  His usefulness as a human embodiment of nationalist values greatly increased with his unexpected death in 1878, not long after the leftist Sinistra party took over parliament in 1876 and retained control for most of the next quarter century.  All of the urban projects in Rome sponsored by the Sinistra government emphasized the theme of permanence, which reflected their political aspiration to possess Rome and played a major role in the definition of the king’s posthumous image.  The pages of L’Illustrazione Italiana chronicled in detail the king’s funerals in the ancient Roman Pantheon, the various events and national pilgrimages to his tomb there, and the contentious restoration of the Pantheon that removed external signs of its ecclesiastical role as a church.  No urban project in Rome enjoyed more attention than the lengthy genesis of the Monument to Vittorio Emanuele II, eventually erected on the north slope of the Capitoline.

While historians from a variety of disciplines (including urban and architectural history) frequently use representations from the pages of 19th-century illustrated weeklies to illustrate their analyses, the role played by those weeklies in shaping history is rarely considered.  This essay examines how illustrated news coverage of patriotic events and urban interventions associated with King Vittorio Emanuele II and sponsored by the Italian government in the pages of L’Illustrazione Italiana helped solidify and popularize the transformation of Rome into the secular capital of modern Italy.  Rather than analyze the government projects themselves, this essay considers the implications of their representation as more than just documentation, but as implicit endorsement and promotion by this northern Italian publication of the nationalization and secularization of Rome. L’Illustrazione Italiana was the leading illustrated weekly news magazine of its day in Italy, comparable to the earlier Illustrated London News (began 1842) and Harper’s Weekly in the United States (begun in 1857).  Originally published with the name La Nuova Illustrazione Universale (changed in October 1875), “it spearheaded a drive by Fratelli Treves, one of the largest publishing houses in the country, to carve out a market across Italy for its products”.[2]  Based on its high production quality, its relatively high newsstand price compared to other Italian news weeklies and the type of products and services advertised in its pages, John Dickie has deduced that its readership was mostly an urban bourgeoisie that spanned much of the country.[3]  The regular politics of the country were rarely “a suitable subject matter for its own brand of celebratory patriotism.  It preferred to deal with the paraphernalia of government, the ceremonies, personalities, and grand speeches. The many new patriotic monuments and rites of Umbertian Italy are perhaps the Illustrazione Italiana’s favorite of all topics”.[4]  From the news magazine’s founding in 1873 until 1887, Emilio Treves directed its publication, while Raffaele Barbiera served as editor in chief from 1874 to 1904.  They no doubt played a central role in editorial decisions and the degree of coverage of Rome and of the king.  Among the artists working for the illustrated weekly, most images of Rome came from the hand of Dante Paolocci (1849-1926), who served as its correspondent there for three decades beginning in 1875.  The sculptor Ettore Ximenes also supplied images to the weekly.

The Risorgimento, Italy’s national unification movement, drew its leadership and energy from the more prosperous and industrialized northern regions of the peninsula.  The traditional seat of the Savoy dynasty and capital of the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia since 1720, Turin became the first national capital of Italy, while its king, Vittorio Emanuele II, became the country’s first monarch.  As the country quickly unified, the capital moved to Florence in 1865.  Strong regional tensions, however, threatened the growing unification, which by then only lacked the Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia and the Papal States based in Rome.  Italian leaders, eager to see their country join the ranks of great European powers, had to overcome an acute sense of insecurity engendered by centuries of foreign domination, coupled with Italy’s late arrival at nationhood.  They recognized that legitimacy as a country required Rome as the capital.  Its capture on September 20, 1870, brought an end to the Risorgimento and opened a new chapter in the life of the Eternal City. The masthead of L’Illustrazione Italiana (figure 1) clearly reflected the centrality of Rome within the cultural landscape of the newly unified Italy.  Its architectural panorama evokes the masthead of the older Illustrated London News, which depicted the skyline of London.  References to Rome dominate the centre of the composition, where a pedestal adorned with a relief carving of the She-Wolf suckling Romulus and Remus, the mythical founders of the city, supports an allegorical bust of Italy with the Star of Italy hovering above – a very popular symbol of the country during the Risorgimento.  Flanking the pedestal in the foreground are a pair of allegories, to the left representing the arts, dominated by architecture, and to the right representing science and knowledge.  An architectural panorama spreads out behind, centred on a frontal view of the Capitoline palaces, the seat of municipal power and symbol of Renaissance Rome, flanked by the ruins of the Temple of Saturn in the Roman Forum on the left and one of the city’s ancient triumphal columns to the right.  To the left are representations of the Basilica di San Marco in Venice, the Two Towers in Bologna, and the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence; to the right are the Duomo in Milan and the Leaning Tower of Pisa and that city’s Duomo.  The masthead also reflected the publication’s northern bias with no southern cities represented and only a smoking volcano in the far right distance, likely an allusion to either Mount Vesuvius or Mount Etna, to evoke the South.  The masthead offered readers a weekly reminder of Rome as a secular national capital rather than as the capital of Catholicism and seat of the papacy.  Conspicuously absent are any of the city’s churches or papal palaces. This focus on Rome paralleled the broader illustrated content of L’Illustrazione Italiana, which focused on the capital more often than other cities. Although Pius IX’s capitulation to Italian troops on September 20, 1870, concluded the Risorgimento and ended 1500 years of papal temporal power, the royal government faced a unique political challenge in its new capital — the continued presence of a rival and still prestigious head of state in the Pope and the pervasive signs of Church power.  His assertions of sovereignty threatened to undermine Italian claims to the possession of Rome and, worse, the legitimacy of the Italian state.  A series of Destra governments, comprising coalitions of Catholic liberals, conservatives and clericals, controlled parliament from 1861 until 1876.  They undertook an ambivalent occupation, attempting to avoid aggressive expressions of patriotism favoured by the opposition Sinistra, especially what they considered anachronistic identifications with antiquity that might antagonize the Pope and jeopardize a hoped-for peace accord.  The situation for the Destra was complicated by the timing and nature of Vittorio Emanuele’s presence in Rome. The dilemma of what image the king should portray in the new Italian capital was reflected in the debate over the manner of his first official entry.  Alfonso Ferrero La Marmora, his Lieutenant in Rome counselled that “the King of Italy cannot … go to kneel down before the Pope; but much less can the King enter Rome as a conqueror treating the head of Catholicism with condescension”.[5] Such caution explains the relative paucity of representations of the king during the early years of Roma Capitale. Vittorio Emanuele used the occasion of the devastating flood of Rome in late December 1870 to make his first official, yet rather furtive visit to the city, arriving on the night of December 30 and appearing before the people of Rome from the balcony of the Palazzo Nuovo on the Capitoline the next day.  Illustrations of his visit appeared in the undated publication Roma, la capitale d’Italia by Vittorio Bersezio.[6] Within the pages of L’Illustrazione Italiana, however, the king himself was most often depicted meeting with other heads of state or national heroes, such as German Emperor William I (in Milan) and Garibaldi (in Rome).[7]

The most conspicuous expressions of patriotism within the capital during the early 1870s were the annual celebrations of Constitution Day – the Festa dello Statuto – involving the unveiling of plaques on civic buildings, portrait busts of heroes of the Risorgimento in the Pincio park, and, beginning in 1872, pyrotechnic displays (girandole) launched either from Castel Sant’Angelo or from temporary constructions, which conformed to a long tradition in Rome of ephemeral monuments as a means of representation.[8]  While such temporary constructions no doubt suited the cautious approach to nationalist imagery in the capital by the Destra-led Italian government, a concern for permanence was a central theme of the public works and monuments commissioned by the Sinistra during their decades-long hold on the national parliament beginning in 1876.

The “parliamentary revolution”[9] of March 1876 brought the anti-clerical Sinistra to power, a position of control it retained into the 20th century.  L’Illustrazione Italiana initially labelled the change in government “The Crisis”, devoting three full unillustrated pages to the event in its March 26, 1876, issue, but on the covers of the subsequent weeks’ issues prominently profiled the new government ministers.[10]

To take possession of Rome properly, Sinistra leaders sought to mark the shift in power from papal capital to Italian national capital.  Government-sponsored architecture and urbanism in the city thus had a two-fold purpose: it attempted to supplant papal imagery and destroy evidence of former Church control, and it consciously recalled the imperial iconography of ancient Rome to create an image of restored secular greatness.  By recapturing the lustre of the golden age of Roman antiquity, they hoped to symbolize the promise of their fledgling Italy.  An early expression of this secular patriotic agenda came not from the state, but from a project proposed in January 1878 by the Municipality of Rome for the transformation of the external facade of the Porta del Popolo, among the first architectural projects in Rome represented in the pages of L’Illustrazione Italiana (figure 2).[11]  The renovation of the gate, designed by municipal architect Agostino Mercandetti, would have removed the papal insignia and dedicatory plaques from both sides.  According to the account in L’Illustrazione Italiana, the new external facade would include statues in the intercolumniations “that would represent four of the men that worked and contributed most to the completion of Italian unity”.  The author enthusiastically continues, noting that new bas-relief plaques would depict the story of “our Risorgimento, of which one should certainly be the entrance into Rome of Vittorio Emanuele”.  Across the top, statues would represent the seven capital cities of the seven former states that constituted Italy, with Rome at the centre and the biggest.  Although the external façade of the gate was expanded according to this design, the actual work retained all papal components and ignored the proposed patriotic imagery.  The fate of this project, published just three days before the death of Vittorio Emanuele II, illustrated the challenge faced by the Sinistra in remaking Rome, given that the country’s Catholics generally remained sympathetic to the Pope.

The emergence of Vittorio Emanuele II as the central embodiment of the Italian state was distinct from the broader iconography of Italian patriotism, where he shared the limelight with other leaders of the Risorgimento – notably Giuseppe Mazzini and Giuseppe Garibaldi.  Alberto Mario Banti notes that the lives of these three main leaders of the Risorgimento were interpreted within the “national-patriotic cultural climate … idealistically as loyal collaborators, united in their effort to build the nation state.  This was the orthodoxy imposed following the deaths of the three heroes, and it was the result of a careful political and cultural orchestration”.[12]  While the pages of L’Illustrazione Italiana provided illustrated coverage of a wide range of patriotic events, it reflected a different reality, one that witnessed an unquestioned pre-eminence of King Vittorio Emanuele, with the magazine lavishing considerably more attention on the celebration of his memory than on any other subject.

For the ruling Sinistra, only the king possessed the appropriate political orientation to embody the constitutional monarchy of the Italian state, whereas both Mazzini and Garibaldi had advocated republicanism. As part of the long-lived House of Savoy, rulers of the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia that became the de facto royal house of Italy, Vittorio Emanuele II stood out as the only figure capable of countering the international stature of the Pope.  While in life Vittorio Emanuele preferred a non-confrontational presence in Rome, the king’s sudden death in Rome on January 9, 1878, gave the Sinistra government its first conspicuous opportunity to enhance the power of the royal image.[13]  Over the following decade, a series of anti-clerical government leaders of the Sinistra, notably the successive Ministers of the Interior (Crispi, Zanardelli and Depretis) and the Ministers of Public Instruction (Coppino and Baccelli) sought to augment the national and imperial character of their king by equating the royal office with the ancient emperors of Rome.  This practice had been used conspicuously by Napoleon earlier in the century both in terms of his own image and through architectural monuments erected in Paris.  Napoleon’s embrace of imperial Roman imagery may have served as a model to the Italian leaders, who had the advantage of having Rome and its antiquities at their disposal with which to cement a connection between imperial Rome and modern Italy.  Whereas Napoleon had expelled Pope Pius VI from the Papal States in 1799 as an assertion of his control over the Eternal City, the less powerful and tacitly diplomatic Italians instead used urban projects associated with Vittorio Emanuele II to showcase their authority in Rome and to signal the end of Papal temporal power.

The death of Vittorio Emanuele II in January 1878 also had a catalytic effect on the development of an urban renovation program by the Sinistra.  The government had already announced its intention to involve the state in the urban affairs of the national capital, but, lacking a specific plan, had not yet acted.  The two funerals held for the king (the second organized by the government itself) demonstrated the tremendous unifying power of the royal office and the enormous propaganda potential of its image.  Meanwhile calls for a national monument to the king – what became known as the “Vittoriano” — provided Sinistra leaders with a popular mandate for direct urban intervention.  The events associated with his funeral, annual commemorations of his death, his tomb in the Pantheon and the national monument to his memory erected on the Capitoline Hill brought regular illustrated attention to projects orchestrated by the Italian government within the pages of the popular illustrated weekly. L’Illustrazione Italiana provided detailed coverage of each stage in the ceremonies surrounding Vittorio Emanuele II’s death and funerals. For several weeks, its pages were filled with multiple images and detailed stories that reinforced his central position within Italian patriotic imagery. These included his lying in state in the Quirinal Palace and the funeral cortege that passed through several of the city’s most important piazzas and along its principal streets, with massive crowds, comprising people from all over Italy, lining the route, as in the Piazza del Popolo, which was documented with an impressive two-page illustration.[14] Most dramatic of all, however, were the two funerals held in the Pantheon.

The Pantheon had been chosen as the site of the royal tomb by Francesco Crispi, the Minister of the Interior and one of the most radical anticlerical members of the Sinistra government.[15]  For patriotic reasons, politicians and popular sentiment agreed that Vittorio Emanuele should remain in Rome, rather than be returned to his native city of Turin, the traditional seat of the House of Savoy, for burial in the Superga, the family mausoleum.  The choice of the Pantheon satisfied both the new king, Umberto I, who agreed to his father remaining in Rome on the condition that he be buried in a place of Catholic worship,[16] and the Vatican, which would allow his burial in “the church in Rome that is judged to be most convenient”, but excluded any of the Patriarchal Basilicas.[17]  The Pantheon satisfied Crispi’s desire to augment the legitimacy and permanence of the nascent royal office, later declaring to parliament, “the throne [of Italy], like the state, must be firm and appear as such, [since] the stability of institutions is revealed to the people by the stability of [their] monuments”.[18]  The desirability of the Pantheon for the royal tomb stemmed from a wealth of attributes beyond its merely being antique: it had had a venerable foundation under Augustus, by his First Consul, Agrippa; it boasted a good state of preservation, indeed the very best preserved among the city’s ancient landmarks; and, most importantly for an imperial mausoleum, it had a round shape, like the highly esteemed tombs of Augustus and Hadrian nearby.[19] No doubt they also had in mind the broader secular connotation of a “pantheon” as a place where a country celebrates and immortalizes its national heroes and great citizens, a tradition deriving from the Roman Pantheon but popularized during the French Revolution by the conversion and renaming of the Church of Ste. Geneviève into Le Panthéon for this purpose. The French use of the Parisian Pantheon to celebrate multiple heroes contrasted to the Sinistra leaders’ focus on Vittorio Emanuele II and their desire to align him alone with ancient emperors through the specific ancient associations of the Pantheon in Rome, a goal that kept them from burying any other Italian heroes there (apart from King Umberto I after his assassination in 1900). The first “Official Funeral”, likely organized by the royal house, took place on January 17, 1876, and was ostensibly a religious service involving the solemn entombment of the king within a provisional resting place inside the Pantheon.  The extravagant decorations – given a full-page illustration in L’Illustrazione Italiana – included a large catafalque containing the king’s body, adorned by no less than twelve candelabras supporting myriad candles and guarded by statues of eight imperial lions (figure 3).  Overhead, long strips of velvet, draped from the oculus and secured at the base of dome, formed an enormous canopy.  As the illustrated weekly reported, the widespread sympathy and patriotism

for the monarchy in our country was almost like a revelation. Not only the upper classes, but the middle and lowest classes were moved with such spontaneity and vivacity, from one end of the peninsula to the other, that the natural event became a political event, showing the solidity of the unity of the Italian monarchy. The patriotism won over the republicans and the clericals, save a few and isolated exceptions.[20]

The use of the word “revelation” was important, reflecting the sudden and impressive augmentation of Vittorio Emanuele’s reputation — in death.  For the first time, the king became unquestionably the most potent symbol of Italian unity and therefore also of the state.  The account also reflects the overtly patriotic tone of L’Illustrazione Italiana, whose editors clearly asserted a sympathetic stance towards the modern Italian state.

Interior Minister Crispi orchestrated the much more elaborate and decidedly secular second funeral, or state exequies, held on February 16, delayed by the need to prepare suitable decorations.  Responsibility for the temporary decorations belonged to Michele Coppino, the Minister of Public Instruction, due to his control of national heritage; he appointed Luigi Rosso to lead a team of professors from the Royal Institute of Fine Arts in Rome to create the artistic program.[21] Their decorations, described in detail in L’Illustrazione Italiana, utterly transformed the Pantheon with suitably august and imperialistic adornments that fully exploited the burgeoning emblematic power of the king and his office. On the exterior, their work effectively “restored” the temple to its ancient state, resembling contemporary reconstructions of the building’s original appearance (figure 4).  The decorations took full advantage of the symbolic associations of the Pantheon with fame and immortality, as well as its resemblance to ancient dynastic mausoleums.  The acroteria above the pediment included at the peak an imperial eagle above some trophies, flanked by restored antefixae and, at the ends, allegories of Fame.  Beyond these generalized symbols of authority, their decorative program attempted to augment the prestige of the Italian royal office by equating the Savoy dynasty with the imperial dynasties of antiquity.  To this end, the tympanum scene represented the apotheosis of the House of Savoy.  Covering the traces of the Agrippan dedication, meanwhile, the architrave inscription strengthened the identification of Italy’s first king with the first emperor of Rome: “Padre della Patria” was a direct translation of “Pater Patriae”, the epithet of Augustus.  It was likely the first time Vittorio Emanuele II was so called and would become his most famous epithet.  The equally fantastic interior decorations devised by Rosso’s team continued the dynastic iconography and utterly disguised the ecclesiastical purpose of the building (figure 5).  Once again, an enormous catafalque occupied the centre of the space.  Representing the king’s imperial power, reposing lions anchored the corners and a Savoy eagle filled the centre of each side.  Covering the oculus overhead, the enormous Star of Italy took up its place at the centre of 140 gas-lit stars of the universe filling the coffers of the dome. Annual commemorations of Vittorio Emanuele II’s death continued the highly propagandistic aggrandizement of the royal office.  Receiving detailed and illustrated press coverage in the pages of L’Illustrazone Italiana, these commemorations reminded readers – and anyone who experienced the events in person – of the imperial stature of the Italian royal house and of the state.  The impressive temporary catafalque erected at the centre of the Pantheon on the occasion of the first anniversary would be reused in the commemorations of 1880 through 1882, further perpetuating the memory of the king.  Designed by architect Giuseppe Massuero in the form of a tall baldachin, the structure featured imperial eagles and numerous smoking tripods that reinforced the king’s association with ancient emperors.  The lone Christian reference appeared in the crucifix held by the figure at the summit.  The predominantly secular character of these commemorations was noted in 1881 by Alessandro Guiccioli, a member of the Chamber of Deputies (the lower house in the Italian parliament), who recorded in his diary that “the official personages showed off their irreligiosity; all this chills and annoys; it was a civil celebration and not religious”.[24]

The “restoration” effected by the temporary decorations for the second funeral conformed to a widespread desire to restore the Pantheon to its ancient state, at the expense of its ecclesiastical character. As part of the country’s ancient patrimony, the national government, and specifically the Ministry of Public Instruction, had control over the exterior and all structural parts of the building, while the Church retained possession of the interior. [25] The entombment of the king in the Pantheon gave Italian leaders an opportunity to take at least partial control of this notable church interior, tipping the building’s ancient-ecclesiastical balance in favor of the former.

As soon as the government decided in April 1881 to keep the royal tomb permanently in the Pantheon, the Minister of Public Instruction Guido Baccelli (whose appointment five months earlier garnered prominent front-page coverage in L’Illustrazione Italiana, which noted that he was the first Roman in the government) led a campaign to restore the building’s exterior to its presumed “original” state.[26]  Although a medical doctor by training, Baccelli was a leading enthusiast for antiquity in the ruling Sinistra and one of its most radical anti-clericals.  He advocated removing all of the supposedly valueless post-antique Christian additions to the Pantheon in order to reveal its distinctive mausoleum-like rotunda.  Besides scientific and aesthetic reasons for the isolation, Baccelli informed the Italian parliament that he also had political motives: revealing its round shape would stress the new function of the building as an imperial mausoleum.[27]

The isolation of the Pantheon sought by Baccelli conformed to a broader practice of disconnecting antiquities from the present urban fabric that had been encouraged since the early 19th century.  The French restoration theorist Louis-Michel Rigaud de l’Isle had advocated a “theory of the two cities”, which demanded that ancient monuments be materially liberated from the living urban tissue down to the ancient soil and had first been applied to the Column of Trajan in a project designed by Valadier but carried out in 1810-1814 after the departure of the French.[28] The physical isolation of the Pantheon carried out by his Ministry of Public Instruction also illustrated an affinity for the ideals of Camillo Boito, Italy’s leading restoration theorist in the second half of the 19th century and a member of numerous government building committees in Rome, who condoned the removal of accretions that distorted the legibility of a structure. In May 1881, Baccelli received official authorization to expropriate the 17th-century Palazzo Bianchi, one of the buildings attached to the rear of the Pantheon, despite opposition from the state treasury, which had objected to the enormous cost – £415,000.[30]  Baccelli’s ambition to uncover the exterior of the Pantheon in its entirety had to be abandoned when the demolition of the Palazzo Bianchi between July 1881 and March 1882 revealed the attached but deteriorated remains of what were identified at the time, as reported in L’Illustrazione Italiana,[31] as the Baths of Agrippa, which were conserved with only minor restoration work to ensure their stability.  In April 1883 the Minister of Public Instruction further diminished the ecclesiastical appearance of the building by demolishing the two bell towers commissioned by Pope Urban VIII in 1626.  L’Illustrazione Italiana provided front-page coverage of the effort (figure 6) and revealed their pro-government sympathy in reporting “As soon as the work of restoring the Pantheon began, l’Illustrazione hastened to publish a view of the work undertaken”.[32]

The progressive mythologizing of Vittorio Emanuele’s reputation to symbolize Italian unity intensified during the annual commemorations of the king’s death in 1883 and 1884.  Accompanying a full-page illustration, L’Illustrazione Italiana commented how “The Pantheon, at Rome, has become the temple of the fatherland, since welcoming the mortal remains of the great Liberator King … the immortal Sovereign”.[33]  The fifth anniversary observance in 1883 diverged from previous years by including a national pilgrimage.  Besides paying homage to the king in the Pantheon, where wreaths were deposited, pilgrims also visited the Capitoline Hill, where the king had first addressed the city in 1870.  L’Illustrazione Italiana noticed the enhanced character of that year’s commemorations, reporting “the veneration for the death of Vittorio Emanuele does not diminish with the passage of years, it increases”. Within a few months of this event, private organizations around Italy began planning an even grander national pilgrimage to the royal tomb for January 1884.[35]  The event had the objective of affirming the “Unity of the Fatherland” by honouring its founder, Vittorio Emanuele, together with the “four makers” of national unity — King Carlo Alberto (Vittorio Emanuele’s father), Count Camillo Benso di Cavour (Italy’s first prime minister), Mazzini and Garibaldi.[36]  Predictably, the government took over control of the event and removed the homages to the other four in order to avoid weakening the centrality of Vittorio Emanuele.[37]  The national pilgrimage attracted a large number of participants: 68,635 pilgrims, almost half of whom belonged to 2,061 patriotic associations, as well as 666 representatives from Italian colonies abroad.[38]  L’Illustrazione Italiana devoted considerable attention to the weeklong event and emblazoned its January 27, 1884, cover with a montage of illustrations testifying to the enormous attendance (figure 7).

For the occasion of the 1884 national pilgrimage to Vittorio Emanuele’s tomb, Minister of Public Instruction Baccelli commissioned Giulio Monteverde to erect a “simulacrum” of his design for the royal tomb at the centre of the Pantheon.[39]  Monteverde rejected the baldachin form of Massuero’s catafalque, perhaps to avoid its ecclesiastical associations.  Instead, his construction involved a massive ancient-style sarcophagus rising eight meters above a broad ten-meter-wide base anchored at the corners by imperial lions.[40]  On January 13, 1884, L’Illustrazione Italiana confidently reported that the “new tomb … will contain the venerated body of King Vittorio” and would require four years for construction.[41]  The central tomb idea, however, was promptly scuttled by a combination of Vatican protests, aesthetic and structural concerns of the Fine Arts Commission and Prime Minister Depretis’s lack of enthusiasm for Baccelli and preference for a national monument to the king on the Capitoline Hill. Less than two years after taking over parliament, the Sinistra government was presented with the ideal opportunity to make a grandiose urban statement that declared their control of Rome.  The death of King Vittorio Emanuele II in 1878 immediately prompted calls for the erection of a national monument in the capital.  Just as quickly controversy erupted over what kind of memorial would best honour the monarch and the country.  A protracted debate and two international competitions led to the final design, selected in 1884.  L’Illustrazione Italiana provided extensive coverage of this process, illustrating the finalist designs and select others from each competition.  Although realized after a quarter century of construction, the Vittoriano, as the monument came to be known, served from the outset of its development as the most powerful weapon in the propaganda arsenal of the Sinistra.

Prior to the first competition, the two-year debate over the monument helped the government to define its objectives – to erect a civil monument, not a religious sepulchre, a monument focused on the king, not a pantheon of illustrious Italians, and a monument of enormous size and national importance, not a mere statue.  In terms of its secularity, its authoritarian subject and its scale, therefore, the monument had already acquired its most fundamental attributes.  What form it should take remained unclear.  As with the state exequies and pilgrimages, all attention as far as the government was concerned had to focus on the king as the embodiment of state power in Rome.

Formulating a design for the national monument to Vittorio Emanuele posed several formidable challenges to competitors.  Besides allowing them complete artistic freedom, the program offered little direction, apart from demanding a monument to “the memory of” the king.  They had to address all of the problems the government had avoided resolving: what location in Rome was most appropriate for the memorial?  What form should it take and how large should it be?  Which style should it have and how would it relate to the question of a national architecture?  How should one depict the king iconographically and what values should the monarchy represent?  What role should be assigned to the monarchy in Rome?  And how to symbolize national unity and the Risorgimento?

The first competition, which left the location and monumental form up to the designers, attracted 315 submissions from thirteen countries by the September 23, 1881, deadline, of which 293 were accepted.  According to L’Illustrazione Italiana, “many were mediocre, some fair, and very few worthy of serious consideration”.[42]  On the surface, the entries offered a remarkable diversity of ideas for the monument.  In his published summaries of the competition, architecture critic Piero Quaglia categorized the designs into six main groups: 1, triumphal arches; 2, honorary columns and monoliths; 3, temples; 4, statuary and isolated monuments; 5, bridges and building projects; and 6, monumental complexes.[43]  The royal commission judging the competition comprised seven artists (one painter, two sculptors and four architects drawn from a broad range of academic institutions from across the country), seven politicians, with the Prime Minister serving as president of the commission, the Mayor of Rome and the president of the Accademia di San Luca.  A week after commencing the judging on February 15, 1882, and over a month before issuing their decision on April 1, the commission had already determined that no project merited being built.[44]

In assessing the various entries, the commission gave the most attention to the designs involving monumental complexes, which received the top two prizes and characterized ten of the fourteen semi-finalists.  The first place award was given to Henri-Paul Nenot, a young French architect and Prix de Rome winner studying in the city, who focused his project on the Piazza dell’Esedra on the edge of the modern city near the Termini train station.  In her study of the Vittoriano, Catherine Brice argues that royal commission president Prime Minister Depretis influenced the award of the first prize to Nenot, either in an attempt to improve economic ties with France or to neutralize the potential domestic political problem of Italian regionalism, of appearing to favour one part of the country at the expense of all others.[45]  Strong nationalist sentiment, however, prevented the public from sharing Depretis’s enthusiasm for Nenot’s design, which was accused of being too French. Although most attention had focused on Nenot, the most important and influential project in the first competition, however, was the second-prize entry by Ettore Ferrari and Pio Piacentini (figure 8).  In contrast to the fruitless controversy over the details of Nenot’s design, the concept of a multi-tiered monument climbing the north slope of the Capitoline Hill and facing the Piazza Venezia had a profound effect on the commission.  As commission member Alessandro Guiccioli wrote in his diary, “beautiful idea, mediocre execution”.[47]  Indeed, it radically altered the evolution of the Vittoriano, eventually purging the commission of its fascination with the Piazza dell’Esedra and the associated symbolism of a monument in the new Rome.  The full significance of the Capitoline site chosen by Ferrari and Piacentini came to the fore in the spirited and protracted site debate in the ensuing months.

The death of Giuseppe Garibaldi on June 2, 1882, posed an immediate challenge to the king’s iconographic hegemony and evidently served as a catalyst in the development of the Monument to Vittorio Emanuele.  The following day, the government approved funding for a national monument to Garibaldi,[48] though its budget of £1,500,000 was one sixth of that allocated for the Vittoriano, reflecting the king’s far greater political significance for the state.  Further, when two members of parliament proposed that Garibaldi be entombed in the Pantheon the government promptly suspended the sitting.[49]  The full extent of the challenge became evident on June 11, when a variety of anti-clerical, masonic, military and municipal groups commemorated the general’s death with an “apotheosis”,[50] evidently without government participation.  L’Illustrazione Italiana reported how they constructed a float that employed the same neo-antique repertory of details that had been used to decorate the funeral catafalques for the king and how a large crowd of representatives from all the major cities of Italy “paraded to the Capitoline, where the spectators crowded one on top of the other as if awaiting the arrival of a Caesar, brought in triumph by way of the Sacra Via” . The timing of Garibaldi’s death and the subsequent patriotic display in his honour at the Capitoline evidently had a decisive influence on the government’s efforts to commemorate Vittorio Emanuele.  Four years and one unsuccessful international competition had already passed without any tangible progress on the national monument to the king.  During the previous two months, the royal commission for the Vittoriano had met only once.  Beginning on June 5, just three days after Garibaldi’s death, they held seven meetings over an eight-day period to debate the site of the structure. [52]  Prior to the “apotheosis” procession to the Capitoline, the commission dismissed that hill as a potential site for the monument due to the high costs of expropriations and foundations and of establishing access routes; they even deemed the Capitoline inferior to the Piazza dell’Esedra for “artistic reasons”.[53]  The popular celebration of Garibaldi at the Capitoline galvanized Prime Minister Depretis’s determination to see that celebrated ancient hill become the site of the king’s monument.  The next meeting of the royal commission that he attended, on September 16, 1882, marked a decisive turning point: criticism of the Capitoline site was suddenly and otherwise inexplicably translated into support and the commission’s official selection of the Capitoline site.[54]

The second international competition for the Monument to Vittorio Emanuele, issued in December 1882 with a deadline of December 15, 1883, had a very clear program that grew out of the royal commission’s site debate.  The monument had to comprise the following essential features: a) a bronze equestrian statue of the king to be placed on the main level and aligned with the axis of the Via del Corso; b) an architectonic backdrop in the form of a portico, a loggia or any other architectonic parti that hid the posterior buildings; and c) stairs ascending to the main level of the monument, which should lie 27 meters above the Piazza Venezia.  This competition attracted 98 entries, of which three were selected by the royal commission on February 9, 1884, to be resubmitted in a third run-off competition.  Along the way L’Illustrazione Italiana offered detailed coverage, illustrating representative entries in its February 24, 1884, issue including that of Giuseppe Sacconi, one of the three finalists invited to develop his design further and the eventual architect of the monument (figure 10).  On the occasion of the placing of the first stone, Sacconi designed an elaborate temporary amphitheatre on the site, along with a central pavilion.  L’Illustrazione Italiana provided a detailed account of the event accompanied by four illustrations, optimistically concluding “It is undoubted that this work will be the most important artistic work of our unification and that among the monuments of the first and of the second Rome, it will underscore to posterity the value of the third Rome, of the Italian Rome”. By the time work began on the Monument to Vittorio Emanuele II in 1885, the king’s symbolic and iconographic primacy had been firmly established – a position aided by the unrivalled attention he received in the pages of L’Illustrazione Italiana.  Commemorations of the other heroes of the Risorgimento paled in comparison: Garibaldi’s monument, a large equestrian statue on a tall pedestal, was erected on the summit of the Janiculum Hill, far from the centre of Rome; and the Mazzini Monument would not be completed until 1895 and was a very modest statue in a small piazza beside the new Corso Vittorio Emanuele.  The enormous scale, central location and protracted construction of the Vittoriano ensured the continued attention of the Italian people up until its completion in 1911. Through its profiling of selective national government-funded urban interventions in Rome during the 1870s and especially the 1880s, L’Illustrazione Italiana helped popularize the city’s new identity as the national capital of Italy. The editorial preference of the news weekly for focusing on architectural projects and ceremonial events associated with King Vittorio Emanuele II, particularly after his death in January 1878, reflected the enormous popularity of the monarch and his status as the de facto public face of the government. By contrast, other government projects enjoyed significantly less, if any, attention in the pages of L’Illustrazione Italiana, such as the creation of the Via Cavour and the Corso Vittorio Emanuele in the heart of the historic centre, the erection of the massive river walls, or the colossal Palazzo di Giustizia. By examining L’Illustrazione Italiana in the context of Rome’s transformation in the late 19th century, this essay considers illustrated weeklies not just as a convenient (and copyright free) source of visuals of historic events or works for historians, but as a participant in the shaping of history. 